Masterclass #1: Why Onchain Analysis?
Bitcoin onchain data provides analysts a degree of X-ray vision into market behaviour, offering powerful tools and insights into investor behaviour that traditional finance can only dream of.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
APR 14, 2024

“Put all your eggs in one basket, and then watch that basket.” —Andrew Carnegie

Bitcoin is unique, and is undoubtedly one of the most loved, hated, feared and revered assets in human history. It’s meteoric bulls, depressing bears, and one of a kind value proposition, has attracted holders and speculators from around the globe; bringing all manner of backgrounds and life experiences with them.

Most importantly, it is a an opt-in system, meaning almost every decision and action by Bitcoin holders which occurs onchain, is a voluntary one.

At the centre of what ultimately makes Bitcoin special, is the organic nature of its ledger, immutably recording who owned what, for how long, and when (the UTXO set). Given the wild volatility of Bitcoin’s price, its ledger offers us a truly unique lens into the full range of human incentives, emotions, decisions, and psychology in relation to markets, fear and greed.

Over the last six years, a fascinating new discipline of analysis has developed for Bitcoin, which focuses on extracting key market information from within the Bitcoin ledger itself. This article will explore some of the most powerful concepts in the field of onchain analysis, and demonstrate just a few of the insights which help investors and traders navigate Bitcoin’s volatile markets with confidence.

The chart below is an example of an onchain tool which helps us identify when different sub-sections of the Bitcoin market are buying low (blue), and selling high (red). The rest of this article will explore the puzzle pieces that make tools like this possible.




Live Chart
At Checkonchain, we believe that onchain analysis is an invaluable toolkit for investors, helping them make better, and more informed decisions, to navigate Bitcoin’s volatility with confidence.

What is Onchain Analysis?

Onchain analysis is an analysis discipline based in the study of the database contained within the Bitcoin blockchain. Analysts can parse this data and extract useful information describing a wide variety of market dynamics, investor behaviour patterns, and capital flows. There are two very distinct fields of blockchain analysis which leverage onchain data:

Forensic analysis, often associated with the tracking individuals for the purposes of law enforcement or surveillance. This is strictly NOT what we are referring to when we use the terms onchain analysis.
Onchain analysis, being the study of aggregate transactions, volumes, and supply dynamics, alongside heuristics to help categorise them, for the purpose of studying Bitcoin markets, trends and asset performance.
By studying and categorising Bitcoin supply and transfer volumes over time, we can develop robust models for investor sentiment, and the flow of capital into, out of, and around the Bitcoin network.

Let’s relate some of these ideas to traditional finance; pick your favourite stock, and imagine you had the ability to model and see:

The average cost basis of all holders who bought within the last year.
When large holders, with a high conviction, start taking profits in size.
Periods when a majority of sold shares are capitulating heavy losses.
If we keep to this analogy of the stock market; Onchain analysis can be thought of as the study of Bitcoin’s quarterly reports, except the reports come out at ~10-min intervals, whenever a new block is found.

At Checkonchain, we often relate onchain analysis to having a degree of X-ray vision for the Bitcoin market, allowing us to see the aggregate holding and spending behaviour of all Bitcoin holders.

Show Me the Alpha

There are two types of investors and traders in markets:

The experienced smart-money who understand the asset, the market, and are the ones who are able to consistently buy low and sell high. They are the 5% to 10% who succeed in generating alpha and edge.
The inexperienced prey who are driven by our hardwired emotional conditioning to avoid risk at all costs. The result of this is most people make the exact wrong decision and the exact wrong time, and consistently buy high and sell low.
Onchain analysis allows us to visualise and assess the behaviour of both sides of this equation. In many ways, it helps us become better contrarians, filtering out all the narratives and noise, and using data to make better decisions.

This chart shows the volume of the Bitcoin supply held for at least 6-months. Note that it steadily rises during bear markets, as coins are patiently accumulated and held by high conviction holders through 75% drawdowns.

These are coins held by the smart money, buying low, waiting to sell high.




Live Chart
The next chart is the opposite, the prey who only arrive after their Uber driver tells them they are missing out on getting ultra wealthy, and when Bitcoin is being plastered across every TV network. The chart below shows the supply which was recently purchased swelling during bull markets, and eventually peaking almost exactly at the market top.

Not only is this describing a point of complete saturation by inexperienced new buyers, it is also the point of maximum divestment by those long-term, high conviction holders from above.

These are coins held by the inexperienced money, buying high..soon to sell low.




Live Chart
The smart money folks who accumulate during Bitcoin’s brutal bear markets tend to lock in large scale profits when the bull returns. We can therefore measure the profit locked in by coins moving onchain to spot overextended periods, when the market has rallied too far too fast, and when profit taking (green) is over-saturating the inflow of demand.




Live Chart
In a bull market, there are many corrections, and that also means there are many local top buyers. The inexperienced often panic when their latest lump sum Bitcoin buy drops in value by -10%, -20%, or -50%. More often than not, they capitulate and panic sell at the exact moment they should really be buying more.

In a similar vein, the start of a serious bear market is signalled when the volume of top buyers becomes very large, and we see a cascade of enormous losses. This exponential acceleration of investor panic occurs during the ‘shot across the bow’ sell-off, and is the moment when market sentiment has truly broken. A regime shift is now underway, and we must put on our bear market goggles to navigate the volatile road ahead.




Live Chart
Bitcoin’s grassroots origin, tends to defy traditional market wisdom. Usually, the ‘dumb-money’ is associated with retail investors with smaller chips at the table. Bitcoin is different, and generally speaking it was Wall Street and the bankers who were later to the party.

If we look at the rate of supply accumulation by smaller holders, we can actually see their changing conviction and experience over time. The first major spike shows retail investors buying heavily into the 2017 market top. In the years that followed however, there was an explosion in high quality Bitcoin educational and analysis content.

Whilst retail investors may have been the top-buying ‘dumb-money’ in 2017, they had evolved into a cohort of ‘smart-money’ by the time the 2022 bear market rolled around. Amidst the carnage of endless sell-offs and collapsing exchanges, retail holders accumulated coins with conviction near the cycle lows, palming off the prevailing narrative that Bitcoin was dead for a decade.




Live Chart
What About Exchanges, Futures and ETFs?

All three are critical and massive components of Bitcoin market structure, and any analyst worth their salt will keep two eyes on these markets as well. Given the majority of Bitcoin trade volume occurs in these ‘off-chain’ orderbooks, a natural conclusion is to assume onchain data has critical gaps. This is of course true, at least in part!

But let’s keep things in perspective, and temper this initial gut-check assessment with some data and statistics.

The chart below shows the USD value of onchain deposits (red) and withdrawals (green) to centralised exchanges like Binance and Coinbase. We then overlay the total spot trade volumes on these exchanges (orange). Every day, hundreds of millions to several billions of dollars in value flow both in, and out of exchanges, often equivalent to 20%, 40% and even 80% of spot trade volumes.

Each one of those onchain transfers carries with it information about how much was transferred, how long it was held, its original cost basis, and the profit or loss the owner locked in when they deposited it.

Onchain data is similar to surveying a very large, and statistically significant subset of the investors, making it valuable insight into the behaviour of the rest of the population (the wider Bitcoin market).




Without getting too deep in the technical weeds, it’s worth highlighting the chart below, which is one that has intrigued us for some time. The chart shows the funding rate paid by traders in futures markets (orange), and compares it to the average profit multiple locked in by coins spent onchain (blue, a metric called SOPR).

One metric describes the directional bias of leveraged traders (buyers), the other the profitability of existing holders transacting in spot markets (sellers). They are telling us a strikingly similar story, but come from two completely different perspectives, and from two very different markets.




Live Chart
Another fascinating link between the derivatives world and onchain transfers demonstrates how we can monitor market volatility across both. In the chart below, the blue trace shows is the implied volatility priced into Bitcoin options markets. The orange trace is derived purely from onchain data, looking at the profit and loss locked in by onchain transactions.

They are almost the same chart!

The information density within onchain data continues to fascinate us every day, and finding relationships and correlations like these are what keeps analysts like us digging for more.




Live Chart
Ultimately, onchain data is packed full of information about the decisions and sentiment of Bitcoin holders. We consider it a study of human psychology in markets, and Bitcoin’s infamous volatility has a unique way of testing everyone’s limits and conviction.

Bringing It All Together

At the end of the day, the power of onchain analysis is that it opens up opportunities to model investor behaviour, and assess when investors buy, sell, and move capital into, or out of Bitcoin.

Onchain analysis can likened to a form of Quantimental Analysis, where we use quantitative data to assess the fundamentals of both Bitcoin, and the markets that surround it. With a trained eye, onchain analysts can extract unparalleled insights describing market sentiment and positioning, which in turn helps us identify periods of market opportunity, and risk.

If this article has piqued your interest, and you‘re keen to learn more, be sure to hit the subscribe button below so you won’t miss our future posts and analysis of the Bitcoin market.




Masterclass #2: The Checkonchain Framework
After many years studying the behaviour of investors baked into Bitcoin's blockchain, we introduce our distilled framework for how we think about, and apply onchain analysis tools to Bitcoin markets.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
MAY 11, 2024
∙ PAID

I would have written a shorter letter, but I did not have the time. - Blaise Pascal

This is one of our all-time favourite quotes, and we love what it highlights; that succinct simplicity is often much harder to achieve than complexity.

Having spent several years studying and developing onchain tools and methodologies, we have explored a great many rabbit holes, often by adding complexity to our models. We have also hit numerous dead ends. Having traversed these grounds, today I am presenting what I believe is a relatively simple, yet effective framework for how to think about onchain data.

💡Most onchain metrics are a cross-section of the Bitcoin supply, telling us a story about who holds it, for how long, and how profitable they are.

This article aims to help our subscribers understand the critical pillars that make onchain analysis so powerful. We introduce the core data types, and a schematic for how we categorise and think about onchain metrics and tools to explore cross-sections of the Bitcoin supply and holder-base.


Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

Three Onchain Advantages

There is a lot of data within the Bitcoin blockchain, but not all of it is necessarily useful. Separating the signal from the noise requires a great deal of experience and proof-of-work. It involves a process of extraction, processing, parsing, and distilling the data into useful metrics and tools.

Many of the advantages onchain analysis provides stem from three powerful data types, all of which traditional markets could only dream of having access to.

Timestamping Coins

Timestamping allows us to monitor how long various sub-sets of the Bitcoin supply have remained held and dormant. For example, we can identify when older coins are transacted (spent) in size, often signifying a changing sentiment amongst long-term and high conviction holders.

A popular metric which visualises this phenomena is the HODL waves, which segments the BTC supply into age bands based on when the coins were last spent.

Timestamping, or Lifespan metrics allow us to bucket the Bitcoin supply by holder conviction. The longer a coin is held, the stronger the hands holding it.




Pricestamping Coins

Pricestamping assigns a cost basis (called a realised price) to coin when they transact onchain. For example, if a coin is acquired and withdrawn from an exchange at a price of $20k, it will retain that cost basis until it moves onchain at some point in the future.

This opens up the opportunity to measure the realised and unrealised profit (or loss), as well as estimates of the aggregate cost basis for different sub-sets of the market.

In the chart below, we can see the magnitude of realised profit and loss each day. This helps us identify periods when many investors are taking chips off the table, but also when the market is crystallising large losses, a characteristic often seen near market lows.

Profit and Loss are core motivators of human decisions in markets. Analysing how ‘in-the-money’ (unrealised) holders are, and how much they ‘locked-in’ (realised) is an great representation of investor sentiment and decisions.




Labelling and Cohorts

Labelling and Cohorts broadly defines a set of tools we use to group the supply, volume, and transactions into cohorts who display similar behaviour patterns. This allows us to better understand and assess the decisions and actions of investors, leveraging both timestamping and pricestamping.

One of the popular and powerful examples of cohorts is Long and Short-Term Holder Supply. This heuristic leverages the observation that the longer a coin remains dormant in an investors wallet, the more likely it is to stay there.




We can also use explicitly labelled wallets, such as those associated with Exchanges, ETFs, Miners, and Custodians. We can use this information to determine when coins are are being deposited directly to exchanges to lock in profits, or when ETFs are see inflows and outflows for example.

Labelling and Cohorts are how we group supply by source, destination, and by behaviour patterns. This allows us to fine tune our analysis, and investigate the decisions of a specific group we believe dominates market structure.




The combination of these three analytical superpowers allows onchain analysts, investors, and traders to gauge investor sentiment and positioning, based on the aggregate holding and spending patterns across the Bitcoin market.

We can model key cost basis levels where the market is likely to react.
We can identify when large and/or long-term holders start to invest or divest.
We can spot when speculators are buying high, and selling low (or vice-versa).
With the foundation of these core data types under our belt, now we can now explore my framework for how I think about onchain analysis when solving problems in the market.

The Checkonchain Framework

The schematic below is a simplified way to visualise my onchain analysis framework. Its purpose is to help us identify the right tool, for the right job, at the right time.

Consider the total volume of this block as a representation of the Bitcoin circulating supply. We then utilise three XYZ axes to subdivide and isolate particular regions of the supply which matter for our analysis.

Are we assessing coins that are held, or those that are on the move?
Do we care if that supply is holding or locking in a profit, or a loss?
Who is locking in those profits? What does this tell us about their conviction?
The height and width of each box is dynamic in reality, but it is measurable at each point in time (or more correctly, at each Bitcoin block-height!).




This framework revolves around three core axes, each being a ‘heuristic’ we use to segment, and take cross-sections of the Bitcoin supply:

Axis 1 (X) - Unspent Supply vs Spent Volume. Are we observing coins which are held and dormant, or those which are on the move?
Axis 2 (Y) - Coins ‘In Profit’ or ‘In Loss’. By leveraging the pricestamp of each coin, we can assess whether a coin is held above or below its cost basis, and the degree of realised and unrealised profit or loss it carries.
Axis 3 (Z) - Cohorts and Entities. Finally, we use timestamping, wallet sizes and labels to characterise coins by their owner. From this we can draw conclusions about the historical and expected behaviour patterns of the cohort in question.
Onchain metrics can then be constructed to take a cross section along one, or many of these axes, allowing us to inspect investor behaviour with varying degrees of granularity.

Axis 1 - Unspent Supply vs Spent Volume

At the time of writing, the circulating supply of Bitcoin is 19.694M BTC (yellow). However, on any particular day, the total (unfiltered) volume transacting is around 920k BTC/day (orange), around 5% of the supply.




Generally speaking, a significant proportion of this volume is what we consider to be ‘non-economical’. This includes transactions where investors are consolidating their holdings (self-spends), correcting for obvious change in a payment, or when exchanges perform internal wallet management.

When we filter out these internal transfer volumes, the ‘economical’ volume drops significantly, currently at around 155k BTC/day (red). Note that this represents less than 1% of the circulating supply, and this includes instances where the same unit of BTC transacts twice if they are deemed ‘economical’ in nature.

Whilst the vast majority of Unspent Supply remains dormant, this small fraction of Spent Volume is what actually changes the state of the Bitcoin holder base each day.

We can now introduce the first axis (X) in our framework:

Unspent Supply is dormant and immobile, and tells us information about existing holders. We can see how long coins have been held for, in what volumes, and whether they are self-custodied, or held at exchanges.
Spent Volumes are active and mobile, and provide information about the investing and divesting decisions of holders. Volume metrics explore what is changing across the network, and by what magnitude.



We can take all manner of cross sections through either Unspent Supply, or the Spent Volume, to investigate and characterise who holds the coins, for how long, and when and where they send them.

Relatively speaking, Unspent Supply metrics tend to be softer indicators, telling us about the incentives and characteristics of existing holders.

If we see that a large percent of the supply has been held for more than 1-year, it is usually a sign of a fairly high conviction holder base. This is great to see, but it is telling us about what happened one year ago, and less so what is happening today.

If that ‘old supply’ starts to decline however, as it is in the chart below, it tells us that these older coins are now on the move. This is usually in response to a rising market, as long-term holders divest and take profits into market strength.




On the other hand, Spent Volume metrics are dynamic, noisier, but packed full of information about what is happening today.

They tell us about the current spending behaviour of new and existing holders, and are particularly well suited for more active traders and strategies.

When significant volumes of long-held coins are on the move, especially those locking in large magnitudes of profit or loss, onchain analysis is an ideal toolkit to spot it. These metrics tells us about changes in investor sentiment, as well as when previously dormant coins are being spent back into liquid circulation.




Axis 2 - Coins ‘In Profit’ vs ‘In Loss’

It could be argued that market prices are a derivative of both capital flows, and the human emotions of fear and greed, plotted against time. At the end of the day, investors generally respond to the the profitability of their position, and are conscious and sensitive to prices relative to their cost basis.

This is where we introduce the second axis (Y) of our framework:

Coins ‘In Profit’ which are defined as coins which are held or transacted at a price above their original cost basis. From this we can measure the amount of supply held at a profit, the magnitude of unrealised gains, or the average profit locked in when they are spent.
Coins ‘In Loss’ is of course the other side of this equation, being coins held or transacted below their cost basis. Observations of large supply held at a loss is typical of bearish trends, and can be used to spot market inflection points. We often use ‘in loss’ metrics to identify when sellers finally capitulate and reach seller exhaustion, often at the exact wrong time!
In our experience, Profit and Loss metrics, particularly those in the Spent domain, are some of the most actionable and useful onchain tools for active traders and strategies.




There is one deeper layer to the way we categorise Profit/Loss metrics, which can be broken into four distinct metric types:

Supply or Volume in Profit/Loss measuring how many coins are held or transacted in profit or loss.
Supply/Volume metrics tend to provide a bigger picture insight into Bitcoin market cycles and extremes. The metrics are binary in nature, as a coin can be either in-profit, or in-loss. As a result, they tell us a more macro story, but can miss the finer nuances.




Unrealised Profit/Loss measuring the magnitude of ‘paper’ gains or losses held within the Unspent Supply. A popular example is the MVRV Ratio, which describes the profit multiple held by the average Bitcoin investor, presented as an oscillator.
Unrealised profit and loss tell us about the implied pressure on holders. The more ‘in-the-money’ or ‘underwater’ a holder is, the more likely they are to respond (this is an assumed behaviour).




Realised Profit/Loss measuring the magnitude of gains or losses locked in by Spent Volume. A powerful insight we can draw from coins being revalued higher or lower, is it provides a direct measure of capital flows into, or out of Bitcoin. When profits (or losses) are taken by one investor, the buyer must match it with an equivalent amount of capital to absorbing those coins at the new cost basis.
Realised profit/loss metrics are our personal favourite category, as they tells us about the actions taken by the market. When lots of investors are taking profit, we want to know about it. When top buyers capitulate at the same time, we want to know about it. These metrics are the lens we view these events through.




Average On-chain Cost Basis models which allow us to aggregate all coins held by a particular cohort, and model their average acquisition price.
We use cost basis models to assess price levels where different cohorts are likely to be sensitive to volatility, often bolstering analysis of market support and resistance. We can also project this onto price levels where investors would be holding a sufficient amount profit or loss that they are likely to start selling.




Axis 3 - Cohorts and Entities

We have already alluded to the final axis in our framework a few times, largely because it is such a powerful method for analysing the Bitcoin market. What we aim to do is address the important question of by whom?

The third and final axis in our framework (Z) looks at cohorts and entities, where we use heuristics to bundle up BTC holders into groups displaying a similar behaviour pattern. We can group coins by when they were acquired, in what size, and at what price.

There are several common heuristics we use, each offering a unique perspective:

Long and Short-Term Holders (LTHs and STHs). This leverages the pioneering work by Glassnode, who identified that the longer a coin remains in an investors wallet, the more likely it is to stay there. We often consider LTHs to be akin to the high conviction, ‘smart-money’ holders. STHs on the other hand are closer to the ‘hot ball of money’, representing speculators and new buyers.
Age Bands which we derive from the timestamp of each coin. We group supply into buckets defined by how long it has been since the coin last moved. For example, we can see how many coins are aged between 1-month to 3-months, their cost basis, and their overall holding behaviour. We could also isolate coins which have been held for at least 1-year, and when ancient coins from early in Bitcoin’s history start to move, this is the lens we will see them through.
Wallet Sizes consider how much Bitcoin is held in each address, allowing us to isolate smaller retail level holders from large whale sized entities. We often associate different Wallet size cohorts into increasingly sized ‘sea creatures’ like Shrimp (< 1BTC), Fish (10-100 BTC) or Whales (>1k BTC) for ease of understanding.
Labelled Entities are our final bucket, and more often than not relate to miners, and centralised exchanges like Binance and Coinbase. These insights leverage the powerful labelling work done by onchain data providers like Glassnode, affording us a unique lens on how many coins are deposited and withdrawn from exchanges. We use this data to obtain unparalleled insight into the economic movement across the Bitcoin network.



Bringing it All Together

The power of onchain analysis comes from developing metrics which take a cross-section and isolate some portion of the Bitcoin supply, using any combination of these three axes. We can analyse a specific cohort of interest, assess how long they have held their coins, and determine the degree of profit or loss held by their position on average.

The challenge of course is knowing which cohorts and metrics matter for the problem we are trying to solve! This is where our experience analysing onchain data comes in, as we have helped develop many of the metrics, methods, and approaches described above.

Thanks for reading our post, and we hope you learned something new about Bitcoin and the remarkable world of onchain data contained within it. As always, if you have any questions, we’re happy to answer!

Thanks for reading,

Masterclass #3: Realised Cap and MVRV Foundations
The Realised Cap and MVRV Ratio are arguably the most important and foundational metrics in onchain analysis. They are simple but essential tools for HODLers looking to navigate Bitcoin market cycles.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
MAY 12, 2024
∙ PAID

"An investment in knowledge pays the best interest." - Benjamin Franklin

If you spend enough time around checkonchain channels, you will eventually hear us banging on about how much we love the Realised Cap. Not only was it the first breakthrough onchain metric back in 2018, it was also the subject of what was probably the world’s first onchain educational video on the internet (by yours truly).

The main reason we love this metric so much is that it forms the backbone which supports so many of the incredible insights we can draw from onchain data.

This article is the first in the checkonchain Masterclass series, where we will break down the most important onchain concepts, metrics and tools for our subscribers.

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

🎥 Watch the video version here:


Introducing the Realised Cap

The Realised Cap comes from the concept of pricestamping, where we value each coin (UTXO) at the time when it last transacted onchain. As coins move around the network, and change hands, they are revalued to a new cost basis, reflecting a net capital inflow or outflow.

If you buy 1 BTC at $10k, its realised value remains saved at that price (the acquisition cost). If that coin is spent and sold at a later date at a price of $60k, the buyer must necessarily inject $60k worth of capital, adding an additional $50k of value to the Realised Cap.

Should that new buyer then panic sell at $30k in the bear market, they will have destroyed $30k worth of capital, subtracting if from the Realised Cap.

The Realised Cap is therefore a measure of the total value saved, stored, or invested in Bitcoin, and it is currently over $560B.

When people ask me how I know the Bitcoin network is growing and increasing in network effects, I point them to the swelling size of the realised cap.




Live Chart
You can see that the Realised Cap moves in two modes:

Plateaus and downtrends in bears, as top buyers crystallise losses and are washed out by the infamous 75%+ drawdowns.
Rip-roaring uptrends in bulls, where long-term holders take the coins they acquired at cheap prices, and sell to the aforementioned top buyers for a profit.
The steeper the trend (in either direction), the more profit or loss is being locked in. Hold onto that thought, we will revisit it in an upcoming section.




Live Chart
We can also spot market regime shifts when the Realised Cap hits an inflection point. When the bull is over, the dominant investor behaviour shifts from euphoric profit taking, into panic selling, and eventually back into recovery profit taking.

There are three types of inflection point shown below:

🔴 Bull Market Peaks - The Realised Cap stops climbing, and starts to plateau as the trend in capital switches from profit to loss dominance.
🔵 Bear Market Recovery - After the final capitulation, a market floor is established by the HODLers, and capital starts to flow into Bitcoin once again.
🟢 Bull Market Acceleration - Usually as the market approaches new ATHs, those bold bottom buying HODLers start taking chips off the table at higher prices.



Live Chart
Profit Taking During Bull Markets

As we noted earlier, the steepness of the Realised Cap gradient is also an important indicator, and we can measure it to obtain the Net Realised Profit/Loss metric. Now we can see the coins acquired at cheap prices 🟧 being sold at higher prices for a handsome profit during the bull cycle 🟩.




Live Chart
Local and global market tops tend to be set after periods when profit taking sell-side pressure becomes too great, and it overwhelms the inflowing demand. The market often consolidates or corrects after this, but investors still like to add to their stack, and will start to buy on dips.

During resilient uptrends, this metric approaches often approaches and hits the break-even level of 1.0. The market will often find support at this level, suggesting as investors are buying at or near their cost basis.

Note: Net Realised Profit/Loss isn’t the ideal metric to track this behaviour, but a very similar tool like SOPR and STH-SOPR are perfectly suited for this application.




Live Chart
Crystallising Losses During Bear Markets

As you can imagine, many of these principles work in reverse during bear markets. Everyone has to pay their market tuition, and we all go through the experience of buying the absolute top of a market at some stage in our career.

Many coins which are bought high 🟧 are inevitably sold low 🟥, and the Realised Cap will decline as a result. This reflects a net capital outflow from the Bitcoin network, otherwise known as capital destruction.




Live Chart
As the panic of a bear market sets in, dip buying gives way to rip selling, and investors begin to prefer to sell as close to their break even prices as they possibly can (give me my money back Mr Market!).

The breakeven level of 1.0 has now become resistance, which only exacerbates the duration and pain of the bear. Finally, after every hopeful HODLer is worn down…the market reaches a point of ultimate capitulation, usually punctuated by one (sometimes two) massive sell-off that convinces everyone that Bitcoin is finally dead.

This creates massive negative spikes in Net Realised Profit/Loss, signalling that is it not actually Bitcoin which has died, it is actually the bear cycle which is over!

However, I can assure you, it sure doesn’t feel that way when it happens…




Live Chart
The Marvellous MVRV Ratio

Pretty soon after the Realised Cap metric was released, the brilliant onchain OG duo of David Puell and Murad Mahmudov invented the MVRV Ratio; standing for Market Value to Realised Value. It is an oscillator which measures the divergence between price and the realised price (which is the average cost basis per coin).

The MVRV Ratio describes the average unrealised profit or loss held by the market.




Live Chart
The MVRV Ratio has a relatively simple interpretation framework:

Higher values mean everyone is happy, and holding big green paper gains. Careful though, as extremely high MVRV values mean sellers are increasingly likely to take ever larger profits (sell-side).
Low values mean most folks are sad, and nursing very red portfolios. However, extremely low values also mean that the weak hands are almost completely shaken out, and only the strong handed HODLers remain.
A value of 1.0 is the breakeven level, and has historically only been intersected during the very late stages of bear markets.



Live Chart
If you have made it this far, well done, you’ve made it through the most important part of this article. We have covered the core fundamentals of the Realised Cap and MVRV, but there is so much more to this iceberg. The section below will very briefly touch on some more advanced concepts which we will explore more in later posts.

Advanced MVRV Divergences and Momentum

We can also find bearish divergences in the MVRV, being points in time where price is trading to higher levels, but MVRV is struggling to, or not at all. The chart below shows the fabled 2017 parabolic peak. Notice how price was mooning on each leg higher, but MVRV was not?

How can price be higher, but the average paper gains held be lower?

This divergence is describing top buyers starting to saturate the market, as well as a market with a relatively expensive average cost basis.

All the new folks who only bought Bitcoin because it was shown on the TV are now buying in, and their cost basis is much higher than the average bear. Simultaneously, the smart money who acquired cheap coins in the previous bear market are on the sell-side, and divesting with each leg higher.




Live Chart
We can see a similar divergence in 2021 except on two different scales:

🔴Local Divergence in March to May 2021 as the first peak was established.
🔵Global Divergence between the April and November 2021 peaks. This shows that an absolutely enormous volume of coins took profits on the second leg up.
Hint: you will now be able to recognise where the weird looking ‘hump’ which peaked in the Realised Cap in Dec-2021 comes from!



Live Chart
This final chart shows one of my preferred tools for tracking big picture market momentum. It uses a very simple cross-over between the MVRV Ratio, and its 1y moving average.

When a bull market finally reaches its crescendo, it usually comes with a huge influx of top buyers; who buy too many coins, at too high of a price. This makes the market ‘Top Heavy’, and when prices eventually sell-off, all those paper gains evaporate very quickly.

This causes the MVRV Ratio to fall rapidly, and slice decisively below its 1y average. This indicates that sentiment is most likely broken to the downside, and the bear is probably here when this happens.

On the flip side, after a major capitulation event, a huge number of coins are transferred to the hardcore HODLers and sat stackers who set the floor. When there are no sellers left, the market becomes ‘Bottom Heavy’, and only the strong remain.

A decisive break of MVRV back above the 1yr average often signifies that the bear has been slain, and we can start becoming more constructive on the trend ahead. Also note that bullish divergences occur in the MVRV during ‘Bottom Heavy’ markets, as price trades sideways or down, but MVRV starts moving higher.




Live Chart
Summary

I do hope you enjoyed reading (and watching) this masterclass on the Realised Cap and MVRV Ratio. Understanding these metrics was my personal ‘ah-ha’ moment with Bitcoin onchain analysis, and I have been hooked ever since.

If you can wrap your head around the mechanics of what these tools are describing, you will set yourself up to find opportunities and avoid risks throughout Bitcoin market cycles. Let me leave you with some final thoughts to ponder as I find them extremely useful when thinking about markets in general.

Every buyer is matched with a seller (and vice-versa).
Profit taking (supply) is therefore also a measure of capital inflows (demand).
Realised losses are a capital outflow, but also still represent demand.
A little profit is good, but too much of it creates sellers.
When the market feels the worst…the downtrend is probably almost over.
When the market feels unstoppable…check the MVRV Ratio!.
Thanks for reading!

James




Masterclass #4: Onchain Originals Price Models
One of the most natural applications of onchain data is to seek valuation models, which help us identify, and take advantage of market inflection points, and extremes in investor sentiment.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
MAY 25, 2024
∙ PAID
Onchain analysis is a relatively young discipline, and the early golden years of innovation kicked off in late 2018 when Coin Metrics released the Realised Cap. For several months after, there was a mad rush by analysts posting research papers and exploring new ways to slice, dice and interpret the incredible world contained within Bitcoin’s database.

It is very natural for analysts and investors to seek price models as a first port of call, as these tools are easily understood by the widest cross section of people. Price is a central point of focus for any asset, and this makes it an attractive avenue for traders and investors alike.

In today’s session, we will explore some of the key onchain pricing models which have been developed over the years, which I affectionately refer to as the Onchain Originals. They broadly fall into three categories:

Floor Models which are intersected during the later stages of bear markets.
Mean Reversion Models, which price tends to oscillate around over time.
Euphoria models which indicate prices are becoming attractive enough for HODLers to start taking profits.
The goal of this exploration is to establish WHY I pay attention to these models specifically, and the market dynamics they are describing. It is important to remember that these price models reflect approximate zones where a specific investor behaviour is likely to occur, or shift gears.

In reality, it is these change sin investor behaviour which establish tops and bottoms, not the strict intersection between spot price and a model.

📽️ Note: If you prefer to watch the video via Youtube, it is available here.

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

Floor Models

Bear markets end when all sellers have been exhausted.

It takes a very particular type of personality to step in and buy an asset like Bitcoin after it has traded down more than 75% from the ATH. If we flip these observations around, we can reasonably say that bear market floors are established when only the hardcore HODLers remain.

So with this in mind, we can develop a set of pricing models that attempt to describe moments when the coin supply is disproportionately held by those holders with the strongest and longest term conviction:

Delta Price

🟡 Delta Price is a hybrid onchain / technical model calculated by subtracting the all-time-average price from the realised price. This model tries to temper the average cost basis per coin (realised price) with the gradual decay of Bitcoin’s return profile as it grows in size.

Balanced Price

🟠 Balanced Price is a true to form onchain model which subtracts the value of the all-time coinday destruction (called the transferred price) from the average onchain cost basis per coin (the realised price). This reflects a sort of ‘price paid minus price spent type of model’.

 
Cointime Price

🔴 Cointime Price is my preferred floor model, and it was originally inspired by Transferred Price. Cointime price calculates the all-time-sum of Bitcoin’s economic activity, expressed via coinblock destruction, and then distributes it across the coinblocks which remain held within the system.

In other words, calculate all the time-and-volume weighted economic activity of Bitcoin, and spread it across the value held by the HODLers who refuse to spend their coins.

 
If we believe that a bear market floor is established when all the sellers are exhausted (coinblock destruction), and only the HODLers remain (coinblocks stored), then Cointime Price should be a decent representation of those conditions.

Note: The brilliant David Puell is the author of both Delta and Balanced price, and was also the co-author of Cointime Price, alongside myself.




Live Chart
Mean Reversion Models

The ideal mean reversion model is one which maintains a strong gravitational pull on the spot price. The market can run and deviate above or below it at times, but we can expect it to always get hauled back to reality eventually.

What is most important is finding a strong gravitational force which is ever-present, repeatable, and can be relied upon to bring price back in line.

In my opinion, there is only one constant in markets —> the hundred thousand year old hardware which creates our human emotional response to profit and loss…our brain.

There are a few principles that rely on this constant which I always have in the back of my mind when I analyse markets:

Profit and Loss are the driving factors of markets. Investors and traders make decisions based on their current, and future expectations of profit and loss.
HODLers can handle levels of financial pain that few others can. This means there is a measurable magnitude for how red a Bitcoin portfolio can get before every weak handed speculator is gone, and only the hardcore HODLers remain.
Every investor has a price. Even if it isn’t your price, you can imagine a scenario where Bitcoin traded to $1 million, or $100 overnight, and someone out there will for sure take that as an indicator to sell their position.
You will notice a theme in the principles above in that they all relate to the way profit and loss (incentives) illicit some kind of economical decision (even if it is an emotional one). This is why cost basis models, called realised prices, make for the ideal mean reversion models in the onchain analysis discipline.

There are two primary mean reversion models, and one special mention in this category:

The Realised Price

🟣 The Realised Price is the OG cost basis model, and is best thought of as the average cost basis per unit of BTC in the supply. It computes the value of every coin at the time when it last transacted onchain, and then divides by the circulating supply.

 
Historically speaking, the market intersects the Realised Price during the later stages of bear markets, and could also be argued to be a sort of floor model as a result. Nevertheless, given its intrinsic connection to the average cost basis per coin, extreme deviations above of below it will trigger investor profit taking, or capitulation, respectively.

The MVRV Ratio is another popular onchain metric, and it describes the deviations between the spot price and the realised price. As with many models in this list, it was also co-authored by…Dave Puell…

True Market Mean Price

🔵 The True Market Mean was developed as part of the Cointime Economics framework, and is statistically speaking, the middle of the Bitcoin market. It is computed by dividing the total realised value in secondary markets (excluding the value when a coin is first mined) by the economically active supply.

 
 
The True Market Mean is a remarkable model which Dave and I initially developed from first principles, only to then discover it has some very special properties:

It has a long-term mean AND median of 1.0 (see chart) which suggests the spot price does indeed oscillate around it (strong gravity).
Price has spent approximately half its time above/below it which is another uncanny indicator that it is in the middle of the market.
It discounts the influence of long-dormant and lost coins by adjusting the supply based on the amount of coinblock destruction (economic activity).
It concentrates and focuses on the influence of economically active supply by discounting the tremendous unrealised profit held by ancient lost coins.
In many ways, the True Market Mean is what many analysts believed the Realised Price was for years: the average cost basis per active investor.

As such, the True Market Mean is my personal preferred mean reversion model (with the AVIV Ratio being its MVRV equivalent)




Live Chart
The Short-Term Holder Cost-Basis

The Short-Term Holder cost basis gets a very special mention here, as it is technically another mean reversion model. However, it operates on a much faster time horizon, so really requires its own analysis framework.

Whilst the pricing models we’ve covered so far are relatively slow and stable, this one follows price much more closely, as it represents the average acquisition price for coins acquired in the last 155-days.

Price tends to oscillate around the STH-MVRV and tells us about how sensitive the ‘hot ball or money’ is to market volatility. We will revisit this model in a dedicated masterclass session.




Live Chart
Euphoria Models

Picking the top of a bull market is the holy grail, and there has been no shortage of attempts to find the perfect model. I tend to err towards the assumption that it will always be impossible to model tops consistently due to the ultimate unknown in a Bitcoin bull market: Demand.

It is impossible to forecast the real demand that will flow into Bitcoin, even if we have a pretty decent historical read on the amount of supply that HODLers tend to let go of during the run-up. So with this as context, let’s reframe the question using many of the principles we have already covered.

The ideal pricing model for a cycle top is one where price is high enough that even the most firm gripped HODLers will start taking profits.

That profit taking will over time saturate the inflow of demand, and will eventually slow the market down, and even top it out (even if only temporarily).

There are two onchain models which fit this design brief, although we must be flexible in how we apply them. These models are better thought of as a zone where long-term investor behaviour is likely to switch gears into sell-side, and the market can run through and above them for some time as a result.

Vaulted Price

🟢 Vaulted price is another innovation from the Cointime Economics framework, and can be best thought of as the ‘potential sell-side energy’ held by HODLers. It behaves somewhat counter-intuitively in that it declines when more coins are dormant, and climbs when they are spent.

 
If we consider HODLer sell-side pressure as a variable which is unknown in advance:

When more coins are HODLed, our uncertainty about the markets ability to absorb it increases (thus Vaulted Price is lower).
As profits are taken, and demand absorbs it, we have more confidence that the potential energy of HODLed coins has been converted to kinetic energy (transferred to new demand, thus Vaulted price is higher).
It is a bizarre model which still stretches my noodle to this day, but suffice to say it is a zone where HODLers historically ramp up their sell-side activity.

MVRV +1σ Band

Finally, we can support the Vaulted price with a more explicit measurement of when MVRV has hit a statistically high level. Remember, MVRV measures the average unrealised profit held per coin. Therefore, very high values means a lot of investors are likely to be seeing very big green numbers in their portfolio…and someone will sell eventually.

Markets are a little bit like a game of chicken in this regard, and the higher MVRV goes, the more people will take chips off the table.

We can of course model this with any number of standard deviations (+2σ, +3σ etc), and even model this it as a Z-Score representation. But the core of the story is the same:

When the average coin is sitting on a healthy paper profit (statistically speaking), some of those coins will be sold. The larger the MVRV deviation is, and the longer it goes on for, the more likely a local or global top is around the corner.




Live Chart
Closing Thoughts

Market analysis is rarely a perfect science, and there is no doubt an art to establishing a reliable read on what is going on. In my experience, I have found letting go of strict anchors and price levels, and focusing on the mechanics which start or end the trend is more useful for my process.

I try to focus primarily on the investor behaviours which arrests a trend, which is why I have largely settled on the following models as my go-to price ZONES:

Cointime Price for the lows.
True Market Mean for the middle.
Vaulted Price and MVRV bands for the tops.
It doesn’t have to be perfect, it just has to be consistent, and so far, so good.




Masterclass #5: The MVRV Ratio
The MVRV Ratio is the original onchain oscillator, describing the average unrealised profit or loss held by Bitcoin investors. This makes it an ideal mean reversion model for tracking cycles.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
JUN 16, 2024
∙ PAID

There are very few constants in markets, but one of the few reliable ones is that investors and traders respond to the profit and loss of their portfolio. With the transparency of Bitcoin onchain data, we can use this insight to our advantage.

By pricestamping every coin in the Bitcoin supply, we can track the average cost basis where coins were acquired (the realised price). We can then compare this cost basis to the spot price and calculate the magnitude of unrealised (paper) profit or loss held across the market.

This is how we arrive at the Market Value to Realised Value (MVRV) Ratio, which is one of the oldest, and most widely recognised onchain metrics. It is calculated as the ratio between the Market Cap and the Realised Cap (or between the spot price and the realised price).

 
 
This powerful oscillator reflects the average unrealised profit/loss held per unit of BTC, and is an invaluable addition to the onchain analysis toolbox. In this article, we will explore the foundations of the MVRV Ratio, and how we can use it to model and analyse:

The magnitude of paper gains and profits held by Bitcoin investors.
Points of seller exhaustion near cycle lows.
Periods of maximum HODLer sell-side pressure near cycle tops.
Pricing levels where investor sentiment and behaviour is likely to change.
Market inflection points and shifts in momentum.



Live Chart
Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.


The Unrealised Profit/Loss Multiple

If we refer back to our Checkonchain framework, the MVRV Ratio is taking a cross section along two axes:

Unspent Supply - coins that are still held by investors
Profit/Loss Axis - measuring the average paper gains or losses per coin.
We can also consider MVRV Ratios for different cohorts (such as Long/Short-Term Holders) if we want to take full advantage of all three axes.




Live Chart
MVRV describes the Unrealised Profit and Loss held within the coin supply.

In simpler terms, MVRV describes the magnitude of paper gain or paper loss held by the average coin.

An MVRV of 1.0 means the market is at break-even, and the spot price is equal to the average cost basis (0% profit). The average unrealised profit can therefore be calculated as MVRV minus 1. For example:

MVRV of 1.00 means the average BTC is at break-even (0% profit or loss).
MVRV of 2.40 means the average BTC is holding a +140% paper gain.
MVRV of 0.85 means the average BTC is holding a -15% paper loss.
We can visualise these dynamics via the chart below, which shows the percent of the Bitcoin Market Cap which is held in an unrealised profit (green) or loss (red).

Notice how losses expand during bear markets, representing the unfortunate investors who acquired coins at high prices. Conversely, unrealised profits naturally climb during bull markets, and create the incentive for investors to sell their holdings and take chips off the table.




Live Chart
If we now overlay the MVRV Ratio, we can start to think about the investor psychology and the incentives the metric is describing:

Low MVRV values < 1.0 signal that investors are holding very large unrealised losses. The reality is that very few investors have the fortitude to hold onto an asset that trades significantly below their cost basis, and they eventually capitulate. The holders who do remain near cycle lows, usually have a very high conviction, and are less price sensitive (and ultimately help establish the cycle floor).
High MVRV values > 2.0 signal that investors are holding increasingly large unrealised profits. No matter how strong an investors conviction is, if we continuously ratchet up their portfolio value to +200%…then +300%…+400%(!) eventually, everyone will reach their profit taking threshold. The resulting sell-side is what ultimately saturates demand, and establishes both local and global tops.



Live Chart
Probabilities and Pricing Bands

We have now established the market dynamics described by high and low MVRV values. But what exactly constitutes a ‘high vs low’ value? Is 2.4 big? Is 0.8 better than 0.7?

The chart below shows a histogram of the historical MVRV values (bars), and the cumulative distribution function (CDF, line). The CDF moves from 0% to 100% and shows the percentage of all trading days which closed with a lower MVRV value.

Let’s start with a very simple approach where we consider 10% to be a relatively uncommon event. Under this simple assumption:

🟩 Fewer than 10% of days have an MVRV Below 0.8.
🟥 Fewer than 10% of days have an MVRV Above 3.0 (90% of days are smaller).
🟦 Half of all days have an MVRV above/below 1.6 (the median MVRV).
This is a very simple framework, but the way I like think about it is that if there are only 10% of days with MVRV above 3.0, then the probability MVRV wants to trade to a lower value is somewhere around 90%. It isn’t impossible to trade higher, but it would be relatively uncommon.

The reason MVRV struggles to trade above 3.0 for long periods of time is that an average unrealised profit of 200%+ is a strong enough incentive for a large pool of investors to sell.

Similarly, when MVRV is below 0.8, most of the weaker hands have capitulated, and only the high conviction HODLers remain as holders.




This methodology is simple, but effective. However, it does lack a little bit of scientific rigour. So we can take it to the next level and calculate the long-term average and standard deviation of the MVRV Ratio.

The chart below shows various bands which represent certain deviations from the long term average. We now have a toolkit for identifying MVRV values that we can consider to be high or low from a statistical standpoint.




Live Chart
Recall that MVRV is a ratio between the spot price and the realised price. Therefore if we believe that an MVRV Ratio of 3.0 is getting ‘too high’ we can back-calculate a price level where this risk tolerance level is reached.

Similarly, if we consider MVRV trading at +1.5 standard deviations above the mean to be ‘high’, we can back-calculate a pricing band where MVRV would reach that deviation.

The chart below translates a set of these MVRV deviations into a ribbon of price bands. The interpretation of these are levels are prices where the unrealised profit or loss held by investors is getting large (statistically speaking).

Should the spot price ever reach these altitudes, we can start anticipating a shift in investor behaviour patterns towards strong profit taking, panic selling, or capitulation.




Live Chart
MVRV Z-Score

One of the challenges analysts have with the classic MVRV is the gradual drift it experiences, with lower global highs, and higher global lows over time. This is result of Bitcoin getting larger over time, where price deviations from the realised price get smaller as volatility compresses.

A great solution to this problem is to normalise the MVRV ratio using a Z-Score. This enables us to more accurately measure horizontal levels, representing statistical deviations from the long-term average.

 
Technical note: I will usually use either an all-time-average, or a 4-year rolling average applied to MVRV data since 2012 to calculate the MVRV Z-score.

For the majority of casual analyst applications, the MVRV Z-Score is going to be a more intuitive and reliable indicator than the vanilla metric.




Live Chart
Monitoring Market Momentum

The fun doesn’t stop there, and we can also use the MVRV Ratio to track when the tides are turning, and the market experiences a major inflection point. Imagine the following scenario:

A bull market has been running for three years, and every dip has been bought.
Investor confidence in the trend is up only, and everyone expects it to continue.
More and more people hear about Bitcoin from their uber driver getting rich.
Buyers start to pour in, but many of them have little market experience.
The most exciting period of a bull is right before the end, and a huge volume of new and inexperienced buyers invest their life savings, hoping to get rich…
Who sold them the coins?…The experienced HODLers, who have seen these market patterns before, and know the trend is almost over.
What this situation looks like under the hood is too many buyers, buying too many coins, at too high of a price. We call this condition a ‘Top Heavy Market’. The inexperienced buyers now have a cost basis which is very high and sensitive to a sell-off. They are also the cohort who is very likely to panic when that happens. Meanwhile, the smart money have divested, and they are patiently waiting for a cool down to MUCH lower prices before they start re-accumulating.

MVRV shows this exact event after a cycle peaks 🔴. MVRV goes from very high values…to VERY low values almost overnight. All those unrealised profits have evaporated to become unrealised losses. The average investor is caught offside, and MVRV plunges sharply below its 365-day moving average 🔵.

When the MVRV Ratio breaks convincingly below its 365-day moving average, the bear market has usually arrived. Too many investors are trapped with a high and unfavourable cost basis, and sentiment usually takes a long time to recover.

A similar situation occurs near cycle lows, where all sellers are exhausted and finally capitulate…selling huge volumes of coins at much cheaper prices to the strong hand HODLers who will hold until the next bull. As price climbs off the bottom, those HODLers see their portfolio go from holding large paper losses, back into profit.




Live Chart
If we take the ratio between MVRV and its 365-day average, we can construct a relatively simple oscillator that helps us visualise the strength of a market trend. Severe breaks above or below zero become easy to identify, and so height of the oscillator, signalling stronger or weaker trends.

Momentum cross-overs generally indicate a major inflection point has been reached, and show us when a large cluster of coins have just moved from in profit…to in loss (or vice versa).




Live Chart
Long and Short-Term Holder MVRV

Rounding out this topic, we can introduce the third cohort axis, in this case from the perspective of Long and Short-Term Holders.

The Long-Term Holder MVRV tends to be a very big picture and macro oscillator. It describes the tremendous profits they hold in a bull (often exceeding 10x gains), and losses comparable with the average market in a bear (-20% near the lows). It is also interesting that due to the long holding period of this cohort (at least 155-day), their average realised profit/loss described by LTH-SOPR is very similar.

Generally speaking, LTH-MVRV and LTH-SOPR are slower macro metrics. They can help us identify where we are in a cycle, but are not the most responsive tools for day-to-day analysis.




Live Chart
Short-Term Holder MVRV on the other hand is incredibly useful in all phases of the market cycle. Given it describes the unrealised profit and loss of recent buyers (within the last 155-day), it is an exceptional tool for tracking support, resistance, overbought and oversold conditions.

The break-even level of STH-MVRV equalling 1.0 is support in a bull and resistance in a bear. This signifies when investors are buying the dip, or selling the rip near their cost basis. The psychology at play is as follows:

In a bull market when STH-MVRV equals 1.0, traders often look to add to their positions on pullbacks. The STH-cost basis acts as a sort of psychological ‘value zone’, where they get a second bite at the cherry.
Local tops are often established at STH-MVRV of around 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6. These values signify that traders who recently bought in have very quickly seen their position go into +20%, +40%, or +60%+ profit, respectively.
In a bear market when STH-MVRV equals 1.0, traders often look for any relief rally opportunity to get exit liquidity. They experience the emotion of ‘please give me my money back, Mr Market’, and sell into whatever strength is available.
Local bottoms are often established at STH-MVRV of around 0.8 and 0.7. These values signify that traders have quickly fallen into -10% or -20% unrealised loss, and may exit, thinking the market is heading lower (a sort of seller exhaustion).
STH-MVRV is one of my favourite all weather metrics, and I personally use it all the time to track where we are. It is a lens into the psychology of the hot ball of money which is most sensitive to near-term volatility.




Live Chart
The chart below shows STH-MVRV signalling a local and even global peak when the Short-Term Holder cohort get into too much profit too quickly. The incentive for these traders to take profit is large enough that they overwhelm demand.

Whilst there is no perfect STH-MVRV level which triggers this behaviour, using the levels of 1.2, 1.4, and 1.6 have shown to be fairly decent points of interest.

Also note that we can get a read on the strength of the trend when STH-MVRV is able to consistently blast through above 1.4 and 1.6. This means that even though traders are holding large profit, there is sufficient demand to absorb sell-side and keep going. Quiet and stable uptrends during early bull markets tend to be characterised by STH-MVRV trading below 1.4.




Live Chart
On the flip side, local and global market lows often align with deep STH-MVRV prints below 1.0, as recent buyers are quickly plunged into an unrealised loss. Since the Short-Term Holder cohort is statistically the most likely to panic during a sell-off, this helps us identify seller exhaustion and capitulation events.

Similar to finding local tops, there is no perfect level for STH-MVRV on the downside, although values of 0.8 to 0.7 have historically been good reference levels.




Live Chart
Closing Thoughts

The MVRV Ratio is one of the most important metrics for the budding onchain analyst to wrap their head around. The secret sauce is thinking about what MVRV values mean relative to investor psychology and incentives.

The standard MVRV ratio is important to establish a baseline understanding of the metric. However, for most practical applications, I would recommend analysts consider the MVRV Z-Score and STH-MVRV variants, which are likely to be the most useful additions to our toolkit.

Thanks for reading,

James




Masterclass #6: SOPR
There are many metrics in onchain analysis, but few of them are as powerful and useful as SOPR. If I had to choose only one metric to take with me to analyse Bitcoin on a desert island, this is it.
JUL 19, 2024
∙ PAID

‘be fearful when others are greedy and to be greedy only when others are fearful’ —Warren Buffet

G’day Folks,

I am very excited to bring you the next edition of the checkonchain masterclass series, and today we have something really special. In this session I will cover one of the most powerful, and most useful onchain metrics in our tool-belt, and that is the family of SOPR metrics.

If I was tasked with analysing Bitcoin for an entire cycle using just ONE metric, Short-Term Holder SOPR would hands down, without question, be my choice. It is the Swiss army knife of Bitcoin tools.

Mastery of SOPR will take a few reads of this piece, and a bit of practice. However, for the humble sat stacker, there really is no second best. I personally use SOPR to keep a clear head, counter FOMO, and to optimise my DCA strategy.

I use SOPR to avoid FOMO buying in risky situations, often when the market getting is overly optimistic, usually at the exact wrong time.
I use SOPR to buy when others are fearful, especially when they are capitulating en-mass near a cycle bottom, or during a bull market correction.
I use SOPR to track the characteristics of the market, and to assess whether we are in a bull, a bear, or something in between.
In this masterclass, we will:

Establish the fundamentals of SOPR so we can see why it is so powerful.
Use SOPR to pick both local and global tops and bottoms.
Apply SOPR for determining whether we are in a bull or a bear market.
Assess market probabilities using a very simple framework.
Compare the three variants; SOPR, Long-Term Holder SOPR, and Short-Term Holder SOPR.
Without further ado, let’s dive into the absolute OG GOAT metric: SOPR.

Premium Members will find the full masterclass, and video update (34 mins) below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

Full Premium Video (34 mins)


The Basics of Realised Profit/Loss

To start, let’s position ourselves for where SOPR sits within the Checkonchain Framework. It is a spent metric, meaning it describes coins that are on the move. More often than not, these are coins moving in and out of exchanges for trade.

It also lives on the Profit and Loss axis, telling us about the average profit multiple locked in by investors. We can also break SOPR down by specific investor cohorts as well, so the metric really can take advantage of all three axes.




Live Chart
In our MVRV Masterclass, we discussed the nature of unrealised profit/loss, being the paper gains held by investors on average.

SOPR is a metric that lives in the realised profit/loss domain. Realised metrics provide us a view into the gains or losses being locked in by investors. This makes it a very good gauge of both sell-side pressure, and capital flows.

🟢 Realised Profit peaks during local and global tops. This is the sell-side pressure which eventually overwhelms demand, and causes the market to slow down and correct lower.
🔴 Realised Loss peaks during local and global bottoms. This is sell-side pressure that is associated with fear, panic, and capitulation. The more loss investors lock in, the more likely the market has reached seller exhaustion.



Live Chart
SOPR stands for Spent Output Profit Ratio, and we can break the name down to two parts to demonstrate why it is so useful;

Spent Output, meaning this metric tracks the actual spending behaviour of existing Bitcoin holders. It shows us what is changing in the market, and is an indicator that is closely linked to sell-side pressure.
Profit Ratio, which describes the average profit or loss locked in by investors. At the end of the day, profit and loss are the core driver of our market decisions, and as a result, SOPR is a potent indicator of sentiment.
Technically speaking, SOPR is the ratio between the value of all coins spent that day, and the value at the time they were acquired onchain. As such, it describes the average profit multiple locked in across the cohort of interest.

SOPR of 1.2 means the average coin locked in a +20% profit.
SOPR of 1.0 means the average coin was moved at break-even.
SOPR of 0.85 means the average coin locked in a -15% loss.
 
SOPR is the sister metric to MVRV, and the two have somewhat similar properties.

🟣 MVRV describes the average unrealised profit held by investors. Think of MVRV as the paper gains held by Bitcoiners, which creates an incentive to sell.
🟠 SOPR describes the average realised profit locked in by investors. Think of SOPR as measuring the gain or loss locked in by Bitcoiners, who are taking chips off the table.
The chart below shows these two metrics on the same axis. MVRV tends to have a much larger amplitude as it includes the relatively large profit and loss swings held by HODLers, who buy in the bear market, and hold until the bull.




Live Chart
SOPR has a much smaller amplitude than MVRV, which is because the vast majority of coins which transact each day, were acquired recently. Therefore, the price at which most coins transact is usually only a ±10% difference to original acquisition price.

The chart below shows the distribution of daily SOPR values, which is a beautiful bell curve, centred on the break-even level of 1.0.

Fewer than 5% of all days see the average coin lock in more than a -10% loss.
Only 10% of all days see the average coin lock in more than a +10% profit.
We will revisit this idea when we get to Short-Term Holder SOPR, as this framework helps us identify probabilities in bullish and bearish markets.




Live Chart
The Core Use Cases of SOPR

SOPR is an all weather metric, and it can be used in both bull, and bear markets. We can use it to spot local and global tops, as well as local and global bottoms.

This chart shows two traces;

🟠 SOPR which we can see is very noisy, with many spikes in both directions.
🔵 SOPR with a 7-day EMA applied, which is my preferred way to analyse it.
The 7-day EMA both smooths out daily noise, but also put more weight on recent history. This helps to distil the signal, and identify trends, which makes it a much more useful indicator.




Live Chart
The first major use case of SOPR is for spotting global tops and bottoms, and we can think about it in the following way:

🟢 Extremely High SOPR values mean that investors with large paper profits are starting to take chips off the table in size. These are the smart money, and they are selling coins to new (and often less experienced) speculators.
🔴 Extremely Low SOPR values mean that investors who bought the top, and have HODLed through the entire bear, are finally capitulating. More often than not, this seller exhaustion occurs near the absolute bottom of the cycle.
For application in a live market, I prefer to acquire my BTC when SOPR is as low as possible, and avoid moments buying when SOPR is high.

During bear markets, I look to time my buys for when the level of fear and panic is at a maximum. I wait for very low SOPR values as my signal.

During bulls, I try to time my DCAs for when SOPR is as close to the break-even level (1.0) as I can get, indicating the market has cooled off significantly.




Live Chart
The second major use case of SOPR is for navigating both bull and bear market structures. As a general rule of thumb, we can characterise whether investor sentiment is positive or negative by looking at the way SOPR trades:

SOPR finds support near 1.0 during bulls (Buy-the-dip behaviour). This is due to local top buyers panic selling and pushing SOPR lower. Simultaneously, smart money investors slow their sell-side, with fewer profits taken, and signalling a higher conviction to HODL.
SOPR finds resistance near 1.0 during bears (Sell-the-rip behaviour). This occurs when traders who bought low, start taking profits high, which pushes SOPR higher. Others decide to take whatever exit liquidity is available to ‘get their money back’ as close to break-even as possible.
Points where SOPR convincingly breaks through 1.0, and then flips over behaviour is a great indicator that the market tides may have changed.




Live Chart
Application During Bull and Bear Markets

Bull markets are obviously exciting and energetic events, and it can be hard to keep a cool head when FOMO takes over during a rally.

I use SOPR to keep a clear mind, and avoid buying coins too high, when the sell-side pressure is likely to overwhelm inflowing demand.

During a bull market, my personal SOPR framework is as follows:

The higher SOPR goes, the more likely we are about to have a correction or a period of consolidation. I don’t particularly like buying BTC at a premium, especially when smart money investors are exiting at a healthy profit.
As SOPR corrects back down towards 1.0, it means the market is cooling off, and I become more interested. Smart money are starting to HODL again, and the folks who did not follow step 1 above, start to panic and sell at a loss. Often, this panic and fear is a sign the correction is nearing a local low.
When SOPR trades extremely high, and more than +1σ (standard deviation) above its long term mean, I start looking for signals of a cycle global top. This is where the profit being locked in is becoming massive, and more long-term, high conviction HODLers are selling in size. When folks who bought BTC during the depths of the bear market are exiting, I consider the market as being in a high risk zone.



Live Chart
Bear markets conditions are somewhat the similar, but in reverse. The same logic applies in that I want SOPR to be as low as possible.

When SOPR starts trading back towards 1.0, I assume the market will find resistance, and establish yet another local high. This is the point where traders who bought low, are taking profits, often into increasingly weak bear market demand.
When SOPR trades extremely low, and more than -1σ below the long term mean, we’re close to some kind of capitulation event. to paraphrase Nathan Rothschild; I prefer to acquire my sats when there is blood in the streets.
After a major capitulation event, I watch for bullish divergences, where Price trades sideways or down, but SOPR recovers back towards 1.0. This tells me that the market is bearish in price, but fewer sellers are taking losses, and we’re approaching seller exhaustion.



Live Chart
Long-Term Holder SOPR (LTH-SOPR)

Now that we have the basic properties of SOPR nailed, let’s refine our analysis to look at specific investor cohorts (this is where the magic really happens).

I have mentioned the high conviction, smart money a few times, and we generally categorise them as the Long-Term Holders (LTHs). Coins that fall into the LTH bucket have been HODLed for at least 5-months, and are statistically the least likely to be spent each day.

The chart below shows how LTH-SOPR and LTH-MVRV tend to move with very similar amplitude throughout the cycle. This is due to the long holding periods of this group, where then buy low, wait for many months to years, and then sell high.

As a result, both LTH-SOPR and LTH-MVRV are useful as big picture, macro cycle indicators. They are best applied near cycle extremes, and are less useful on the road to get there.

Nuance note: LTH-SOPR may or may not reach the extremes seen in previous cycles moving forwards. It is a metric that should be considered a ‘ball-park guide’ only.




Live Chart
The HODLers who survive and buy during bear markets, have historically been rewarded with large profit multiples during the bull. LTH-SOPR can get as high as 10, meaning the average HODLer is locking in 900% profit!

Now as a HODLer myself, this metric tells me when my cohort is starting to sell into strength, and I usually slow down (or stop) my regular buys whenever LTH-SOPR and LTH-MVRV are getting towards the higher end.




Live Chart
Now during a bear market, LTH-SOPR actually tells a very different story. You may wonder how it is possible that these long-term HODLers with a great read on the market can end up underwater during the bear?!

LTH-SOPR during bear markets becomes heavily weighted towards HODLers experiencing their first cycle (we have all been there). These folks buy high, and HODL the whole way through…only to capitulate near the absolute bottom.

When LTH-SOPR and LTH-MVRV plunge below 1.0, it is a point of maximum despair, fear, panic, and pain. Some of these new HODLers survive to enjoy the bull that follows. LTH-SOPR in particular, describes those who get off the train at the bottom.




Live Chart
The GOAT Metric: Short-Term Holder SOPR

Ok folks, we have made it. Now we will dive into my all-time-favourite, and my most used metric; Short-Term Holder SOPR (STH-SOPR). I use this thing every single day I do analysis, and there is no other metric for which that I can say the same (I check STH-SOPR before I check price).

A significant amount of my personal development as a HODLer occurred during the choppy 2019-20 period. If STH-SOPR had existed back then (and I understood it), I would have used it to acquire BTC as cheaply as possible using this framework:

I adopt a bullish bias when STH-SOPR has been holding its ground above 1.0.
I prefer to DCA when STH-SOPR is cooling off, and is as close to 1.0 as possible (small undercuts below 1.0 are even better).
The higher STH-SOPR climbs, the less inclined I am to buy (countering feelings of FOMO).
When STH-SOPR falls and stays below 1.0, I would adopt a bearish bias, and only accumulate when it goes down to relatively low values (~ below 0.95).
When the final capitulation occurs, and STH-SOPR looks like it is headed to zero, that would be a good sign we have bottomed out, and I can start getting aggressive.
Instead, my less experienced self bought far too much BTC in the blue zones…and nowhere near enough in the orange circles.




Check’s Formative Bitcoin Years
First up, why Short-Term Holders?

This cohort represents the ‘hot ball of money’ who acquired coins in the last 5-months. They are price sensitive, and their spending is one of the best indicators for near term shifts in sentiment and investor behaviour.

One way I can illustrate why this cohort matters is to ask you how confident you are about following questions (off the top of your head):

What was your average cost basis of the BTC you bought two years ago?
What was the average cost basis of your latest BTC buy?
If you can more easily answer the second question, you can probably guess that your emotional state is more tethered to that price. We tend to forget, and not worry so much about our BTC buys from long ago.

We do however feel the sting whenever our latest buy made immediately before a fat red candle…No matter how long we have been in Bitcoin, our last buy is more likely to be an anchoring point for our investor psychology.

In order to demonstrate how I apply this metric, I will step through the last three cycles, and draw upon all of the SOPR logic we have explored up until this point.

STH-SOPR Structure (2013-17 Cycle)

Broadly speaking, there are four key phases to a STH-SOPR market cycle:

⚪ Warning, where huge profits, suddenly become huge losses, as the first major sell-off kills the bull (most people remain complacent, thinking it will come back).
🔴 Resistance, where STH-SOPR continuously finds resistance at 1.0, often right before the market sells-off once again. This eventually leads to a major capitulation event, and very low SOPR readings.
🔵 Divergence, where STH-SOPR starts trending back towards break-even, whilst prices chop sideways or even downwards. Seller exhaustion is being reached, and I watch for a bullish flip, where STH-SOPR finds support on 1.0.
🟢 Buy-the-Dip, where STH-SOPR holds above 1.0 on a sustained basis during a bullish uptrend, and finds support after short, sharp undercuts of 1.0.
Note that this last point about UNDERCUTS of 1.0 is a very important feature of STH-SOPR, which does not apply to the other variants. More on this shortly.




Live Chart
If we look at the 2018 to 2021 cycle, we saw this same pattern play out several times. The transitional period of 2019-20 made this market cycle quite challenging as there was a lot of choppy behaviour, despite it technically being a great accumulation zone.

However, with STH-SOPR as a guide, these choppy conditions are much easier to navigate. Even if conditions are bearish, acquiring sats near local lows, is much easier to HODL, than sats bought near local tops.

Remember, STH-SOPR is a faster and noisier metric, but this also makes it quite actionable. There are many false signals, but markets are never about being perfectly right all the time, just often enough to be beneficial for my personal strategy.




Live Chart
Finally, I want to touch on the undercut behaviour, which occurs whenever STH-SOPR retests 1.0 from above or below. The reason STH-SOPR is so actionable is it filters out all of the long-term HODLer behaviour, and thus we are focused only on investors active within recent months.

The reality of markets, is that they are cruel, unfair, and most people lose money. STH-SOPR helps us spot when the less sophisticated buyers are buying high (high values), and then mini-capitulating low (low values).

As a contrarian, I want to wait for folks to get just a little bit scared, and then be the one who acquires cheaper sats from panic sellers. During bear markets, when STH-SOPR goes above 1.0, social media will be full of people claiming ‘we’re back!’…

Eventually, we will be back, but it will come AFTER all of these folks have bought high, and sold low many, many…many times.




Live Chart
When we look at the distribution of STH-SOPR during bull markets, we can see that it is centred above 1.0, with 70% of all days seeing people locking in profits.

If we are in a bull market, and STH-SOPR falls below 1.0, there is a 70% chance that it wants to go higher. This is why undercuts are so useful to watch for, as the deeper it is, the better these probabilities get!




Live Chart
For bear markets, we have the opposite effect, where the vast majority of days see coins moving at a loss to their cost basis. Only 25% of days (1-in-4) see investors taking profits overall, which means there is a 75% chance we’re headed lower.

If we are in a bear market, STH-SOPR trading above 1.0 will more often than not be slammed back down into sub-1 territory soon. Eventually we will get a divergence and a flip, but it usually comes after many failed attempts.




Live Chart
Closing Thoughts

This masterclass is a bit longer and more detailed than the others, and that is largely a result of how much time I have spent thinking about the SOPR metric. There is a whole ‘advanced applications of SOPR’ class, but that will be for a later date.

SOPR really is an all weather, all conditions Swiss army knife metric, and it is the one I carry with me wherever I go.

Thanks for reading folks,

James






Masterclass #7: Sell-side Risk Ratio
The Sell-side Risk Ratio provides insight into 'expected volatility', and is an ideal tool for tracking trend exhaustion, market instability, and when price is approaching an equilibrium.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
AUG 30, 2024
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

Markets are always a dynamic process, and are certainly not a static, nor fixed destination. A useful way to think about how markets trade is they are attempt to find equilibrium, pricing in all available information at the time.

As we know, the world is constantly changing, and this means that the equilibrium conditions today, are likely to be different to the equilibrium conditions of tomorrow.

For Bitcoin, we can imagine that its market equilibrium is affected by many factors, such as:

What the price range is, and how long it has been trading around it.
How many coins have been mined, sold, and purchased by miners and investors.
The influx of new capital due to adoption, awareness, and HODLer demand.
Global factors like regulations, liquidity, economic booms, and recessions.
Ironically, by the time the market reaches an equilibrium state, it is almost always a signal that a new wave of disturbing forces are arriving to shake things up again.

In this masterclass module, I will introduce one of my personal favourite metrics, the Sell-side Risk Ratio, which is designed to help navigate these dynamics. This is a fantastic tool for tracking how close, or far away we are from an equilibrium state…and can therefore be considered an indicator for when the next major shake-up is around the corner!

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

The Sell-side Risk Ratio is a metric that describes how close the market is to equilibrium, or instability.
High values indicate the current market trend is approaching trend exhaustion, and investors are signalling they believe the market is becoming unstable.
Low values indicate the market is approaching equilibrium. It often takes several weeks or months to stabilise at this point, but it also means the market wants to move somewhere else soon.
The best way to think about Sell-side Risk Ratios is as a gauge for ‘expected volatility’ expressed via the profit and loss decisions made by investors onchain.
Full Premium Video


What Does Equilibrium Look Like?

To start, we need a methodology to measure ‘equilibrium vs instability’.

Consider the following circumstances:

An investor buys a coin in late 2021, but doesn’t yet realise the cycle top has just been established.
They hold onto that coin throughout the entire 2022 bear market, only to panic and reach maximum fear after FTX collapses in late 2022.
They sell their coin, and lock in a huge realised loss.
This investor does NOT believe the market is stable at the time they sold it. Their action of locking in a large loss signals that they believe the market is not at equilibrium, and is likely heading lower.




On the flip side, think about a brave HODLer who buys their coins later on in the 2022 bear market:

They buy after a major sell-off event, believing we are close to some kind of bottom. They are also willing to weather some volatility in the meantime.
They HODL throughout the final phase of the bear, and then enjoy the 2023-24 bull market which followed.
Since they are now up significantly on their position, they decide to take profits, believing the 2024 ETF hype was getting a bit overheated.
This HODLer is also signalling that they believe the market is becoming unstable. Their action of taking a large realised profit suggests they think the uptrend may be running out of steam.

Both of these large realised profit and loss events signify the market is dynamic, and unstable, and has not reached equilibrium (at least in the mind of the investor).

Note: When we talk about Realised Profit or Loss, we are measuring the price difference between when a coin is acquired (their onchain cost basis), and when it is disposed of (their spent price).




Let’s now consider the opposite conditions, where the magnitude of realised profit or loss locked in is relatively small.

In March 2024, the excitement around the launch of the new US ETFs had peaked, setting a new all-time-high price of $73k. Lots of investors sold into this rally and locked in large profits. What followed was a period of several months of ‘chopsolidation’, where the market traded sideways, and digested the move, attempting to to find equilibrium at a new altitude.

Throughout this chopsolidation process, all of the HODLers who bought during the previous bear were given ample opportunity to take large profits. Similarly, all of the folks who unwittingly purchased coins near the all-time-high, panic sold during multiple sell-off events.

After several months of choppy price action, investors gradually became comfortable with the new trading range. As a result, fewer large magnitude profit and loss events occurred, and investors positioned themselves for the next move.

When most of the transacting coins are doing so at prices very close to their original cost basis, the market is approaching equilibrium. These coins may lock in a small profit, or loss, but the biggest decisions have now been made.




Investors are making small portfolio adjustments at this stage, not big ones. They are not cashing out huge chips, nor panic selling in fear. Instead, this environment describes traders playing within the range, and investors positioning themselves, and waiting for the next major move.

This is the core idea we will use to help measure, and distinguish market equilibrium, from market instability.

Large or Small…Compared To What?

To quickly recap:

Instability is characterised as periods when lots of investors are making big decisions, and taking large volumes of profit and/or loss. They believe the current market trend is unsustainable.
Equilibrium is characterised as periods when most of the coins moving around the chain are coming from a similar cost basis price. These are small portfolio adjustments, and investors and traders are positioning for the next big move.
The chart below shows the combined volume of Realised Profit and Loss locked in each day (in a stacked area chart). Notice how big spikes tend to align with major market events such as cycle tops and bottoms.

These are market inflection points, and investors tend to make big decisions, and lock in the biggest profit/loss volumes at these times.

Conversely, when the market is quiet, boring, and chopping sideways, we see the opposite behaviour. Realised profit/loss volumes become small, and it is often several weeks or months until something big happens.

Think of the combined Realised Profit + Realised Loss volume as the disturbing force, which we measure to assess how stable (low volumes) or unstable (high volumes) the market is.




So how do we determine what classifies as a large or a small event? What do we compare it to for scale?

In this case, we can compare the combined Realised profit + Realised Loss volume to the size of Bitcoin, best measured as the Realised Cap. We now have the three components that make up the Sell-side Risk Ratio.

Think of the Realised Cap as the object this disturbing force is trying to move. The bigger the rock, the more energy it takes to move it from its resting equilibrium!




The Sell-side Risk Ratio

The definition of the Sell-side Risk Ratio is below, and this metric was originally developed by Mikołaj Zakrzowski (2022). It is a simple ratio of the combined Realised Profit + Loss, divided by the Realised Cap:

 
 
The more investors that make big decisions, and spend coins which were acquired at a very different price to today, the more pressure they apply, trying to move the market.

So why is it called the ‘Sell-side Risk Ratio’?

Since only existing coin holders can ‘realise a profit or loss’, this metric describes when those holders express a view that the prevailing trend is becoming unstable. They are by definition sellers, and their actions tell us about the risks they perceive (even if they are ultimately wrong and sell everything near the bottom!)

During Bull Markets, HODLers take heavy profits, and this selling is what eventually overwhelms demand, and puts in local and/or global tops.

The Sell-side Risk Ratio will be high during these periods, signalling an increasingly unstable condition, and a higher likelihood that the uptrend is approaching some kind of crescendo.

Hint, notice that when the Sell-side Risk Ratio hits these high levels, it does not stay there for very long. These events are usually short, and sharp, and often correlate with a major market pivot point.




Live Chart
During late bear markets, and early bull markets, price action is usually choppy, sideways, frustrating, and boring. This tends to correlate with a cooling off of large profit and loss events, and many investors lose interest and walk away. The folks who remain slowly accumulate, and their coins transact around a similar price to their original acquisition cost basis.

The market eventually stabilises, although it often takes several months to do so. The next major move usually requires some large new catalyst or narrative to get the ball rolling again.

The rock is now at rest, and in equilibrium. The Sell-side Risk Ratio will trade towards lower levels as a result.

Hint: Periods where the Sell-side Risk Ratio is low, often take a long time to work through, but they do signify that equilibrium is being reached, slowly, but surely.




Live Chart
Applying Sell-side Risk Ratio in Analysis

Now that we have a framework in place for how to think about the Sell-side Risk Ratio, we can start looking for useful applications for it in our analysis:

High values and upwards trends indicate increasing instability, and a higher probability that the current trend…is approaching its end.
Low values and downwards trends indicate that equilibrium is being established. Whilst it takes time to be reached, it also indicates that a new regime of higher volatility is likely just over the horizon.
Note also that the Sell-side Risk Ratio is a somewhat ‘directionless’ metric. It spikes during bull market tops, but also during major capitulation events. By this logic, it can also be thought of as a form of ‘trend exhaustion’ indicator.

Sell-side Risk Variants

The standard Sell-side Risk Ratio considers the profit and loss locked in by all spent coins that day. It is great metric for a full market overview, and most of the core insights can be pulled from this variant.

Long-Term Holders are typically most active around cycle extremes, particularly when they take huge profits during raging bull markets. The LTH Sell-side Risk Ratio is best applied to identify when their sell-side pressure is starting to work heavily against the bullish trend, and will eventually over-saturate the demand.

Equilibrium conditions also apply for this variant, and the lower it goes, the tighter LTHs are holding onto their coins, and the more likely a bull market is around the corner.




Live Chart
Short-Term Holders are a much more active cohort, and their Sell-side Risk Ratio is faster, noisier, but more responsive. The chart below shows how we can distinguish local tops and bottoms with much more clarity than the slow moving LTH variant, and even the standard Sell-side Risk Ratio.




Live Chart
Very low STH Sell-side Risk Ratios also indicate that a near-term equilibrium has been reached. This variant tends to have relatively sharp lows as well, suggesting equilibrium for these faster money investors is quite temporary.

Generally speaking, the STH Sell-side Risk Ratio will be more useful for active analysis, where a more accurate definition of local tops and bottoms is needed. Note however, that this variant is also more volatile, so there will me more noise and false signals along the way.

It is important to remember that Sell-side Risk Ratios are directionless. They don’t necessarily mean the market wants to trade higher or lower, only that it wants to go somewhere else, and break free of the sideways range!




Live Chart
Closing Thoughts

For the astute analyst, you might have recognised that Sell-side Risk Ratios provide a measure of ‘volatility expectations’. As we briefly hinted at in Masterclass #:1 Why Onchain Analysis, this is exactly the right way to think about it!

In fact, the chart below has overlaid the Sell-side Risk Ratio, with the implied volatility from Bitcoin options markets (on a separate axis). From this perspective, we can see just how similar these metrics are, despite being derived from completely different market sectors.




Live Chart
Truly remarkable how onchain data alone, and the investor behaviour it describes can tell a similar story to derivatives markets. Yet another fascinating rabbit hole for Bitcoin analysts to explore!

Thanks for reading,

James



Masterclass #8: Beating the House Odds: Understanding How the Bitcoin Price Moves
There's a reason that 95% of day traders blow up their account, and it's because the odds are stacked against them. Today, I help quantify the 'HODLers advantage' and how to think about choppy markets
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
SEP 17, 2024
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

Today I want to explore a topic that has been on my to-do list for some time, and that is a proper study of this meme.

Bitcoin Lingers in a 'Neutral' Phase as the Fear and Greed ...


Instinctively, I’ve always felt that the proportion of time where Bitcoins price does absolutely nothing would surprise us. The question was how best to quantify it?

What I found was extremely insightful, and it helped me rationalise a range of market anecdotes that I am sure you have all come across:

Why time in the market (HODLers) beats timing the market (traders).
Why most day-traders (95%+) blow up their accounts.
What happens if you miss the best 10-days, or avoid the 10-worst days.
As investors, we spend a lot of our emotional capital looking at, thinking about, and responding to the daily price chart. However, the odds may not be stacked in our favour at this time-frame.

In this piece, I want to demonstrate the advantage of the average HODLer detaching their emotions their from the daily noise, and instead focusing their strategy in a way which help us beat the odds.

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

Day traders are attempting to beat a three sided coin, with a third of all days rallying, a third selling-off, and a third doing absolutely nothing (±1%).
On larger monthly and quarterly time-frames however, the odds are considerably more favourable, with 56% to 74% odds of upside, and a 10% chance of a 100%+ quarter.
Missing the best 10-days in any 1yr window can often completely nullify returns, whilst a complex and expensive quant strategy which avoids the worst 10-days adds just ~40% to 80%.
For many years, Check the HODLers personal strategy has been to HODL Bitcoin, and stack sats during the worst days. After running this analysis, I now understand my own strategy even better, and can see how it stacks the odds in my favour.

Full Premium Video


The Importance of Time-frames

To start things off, I want to demonstrate why time-frames matter.

Generally speaking, when you look at a price chart over hourly, daily, and even weekly time-frames, it can often seem like a chaotic mess of ups and downs (hint: it is!).

For most people who are glued to the price chart, this is where our emotions live, and the stimulus we respond to most of the time.

The chart below shows how many consecutive green, or red weeks we have in Bitcoin. With few exceptions, it is very rare for Bitcoin to experience more than 3-weeks trending in either direction. Most of the time we have a couple of green weeks followed by a few red weeks (or vice versa).




However when we zoom out to the monthly chart, we have a more consistent pattern of trends. Bull and bear markets are clearer, and periods of chopsolidation stand out like a sore thumb.

These larger time-frames are where trends, investors, and smart money live.

It requires practice and experience to detach your emotions (hourly & daily), from the reason we all hold this asset in the first place (monthly+).




Flipping a Three Sided Coin

The subscriber poll from last week gives us a glimpse into the next question, which is how often Bitcoins price goes up, down, or sideways?

Since there are very few checkonchain Bitcoin bears in the room, I would interpret this result as an approximate a view that Bitcoin we have an equal ~33% chance of going up / down / sideways.




So I plotted out the daily price performance of BTC in a histogram, where I consider a price move of ±1% as a neutral day.

🔴 30% of the time, BTC sells-off more than 1%
⚫ 38% of the time, the BTC price does absolutely nothing (moves less than ±1%)
🟢 32% of the time, BTC rallies more than 1%
On the daily time-frame, you could basically flip a three sided coin and have as much chance of getting the next price move correct.

This is why day-traders blow up and liquidate their accounts, they have a 2-in-3 chance of being wrong no matter what direction they bet on.




Surely these stats should be different depending on whether we are in a bull or a bear market, right?

Not really.

The odds skew ever so slightly towards the macro trend direction, but even in a bull market, we go down ~a third of the time, and in a bear we go up ~a third of the time.

Even in macro bull and bear markets, the Bitcoin price goes sideways 1-in-3 days!




Characterising Chop

The next step is to take a reasonably sized window of 90-days, and sum up how many days were in this ±1% sideways neutral territory. Similar to the first chart, we have occasional bursts where the market trends, and there are periods with more up or down days during that 90-day window.

However, the default is that between 30 and 60 of those 90-days see the Bitcoin price doing absolutely nothing!

In other words, chopsolidation is the expected behaviour for between 1 and 2 out of every 3 days…




The chart below is a funky one, so let me break it down:

We’re looking at the ‘dominance’ (0 to 100%) of neutral days 🔵 and down 🔴 days over a 90-day window.
I am looking for periods which have a similar dominance proportion compared to our current chopsolidation market.
Would you believe it…2019 shows up yet again.

This highlights how boring sideways markets creates significant frustration, which often shakes many traders & investors out of their position.




During bull markets, it makes sense that we should get more up days than down days, and the chart below demonstrates this. During raging bull markets, we tend to get a positive skew where there are ~15 more up days relative to down days.

However, the periods where we have the most down days are not actually during bear markets. We usually the largest number of down days during chopsolidation periods of 2019-20, mid-2021…and right now.

This highlights an important characteristic of markets, which is that the strongest rallies often happen during bear markets.

Investors are naturally skewed to go long, and we tend to want assets to go higher. Assets generally do go up over time, however that ‘hopium bias’ has a side-effect of making us buy a little bit too much when it feels good, especially durings bear market bounces.

The lesson here is that buying when it feels good (FOMO) is often where we make our worst decisions. Most assets will go up over time, but buying when it feels horrible (blood in the streets) tends to be a far better strategy.




Time In The Market

To summarise the key findings so far:

On the daily time-frame, Bitcoin goes up, down, and sideways 1/3 of the time.
Even though chop is the norm, there is an upside skew on longer time-frames.
There are more down days during chopsolidation vs bears, which is why they are so frustrating and difficult to navigate.
When it feels good to buy (FOMO, especially in a bearish trend)…it is usually not the best time to buy.
So now lets zoom out and look at the distribution of Bitcoins price performance on larger scale Monthly and Quarterly time-frames.

Over any rolling monthly window, our odds of the market heading higher are now between 56% and 68%, and only in bears is it around 32%.

If you expect to win a game 56% of the time, you should play all day, as you have a marginally greater chance of winning than losing (the HODLers advantage).




This positive skew is even more dramatic over a quarterly time-frame, where the bulls have more than a 61% chance of a winning quarter.

In all market conditions, there is even a 10% chance of a massive +100% return quarter! Of course, you’d have to be in the market when it happens, and not waiting on the sidelines.




‘But If I Sell Now, I Can Buy Back Lower’

I have received this ‘advice’ countless times from folks who have next to no experience in markets. A common opinion is that any asset which is below its ATH is surely going lower, and the assumption is they have the skill and insight to pick the exact bottom.

The next few charts model what the return profile looks like if you:

⚫ HODL.
🔴 Miss the best 10-days.
🟢 Avoid the worst 10 days.
For the 2019 period, buying and holding would reward you with a +220% return. If you managed to build a picture perfect algorithmic giga-brain quant strategy and avoided the worst 10 days, you’d almost double your return and be up 420%.

The punchline is, if you miss the 10 best days, you’d actually have -45%…This means that the best 10-days in 2019 offset the down days AND are responsible for the +220% upside.

Notice also how the July peak has many of the best and worst days clustered in that area. This is telegraphing a transition into a more volatile and choppy market.




In the first half of the 202-21 bull run, we see a similar story. Post March 2020 HODLers enjoyed a +264% return, measured at the worst point in late-July, and after a -50% sell-off.

The giga-brain quant traders in the room did 1.8x better, but remember, the skill and time investment required to achieve this result is serious proof-of-work.

The guys who tried to time the market, and sold hoping to buy back lower…may miss the best days, and return a measly +22%, effectively giving back the entire bull leg.

Now remember, this is a little bit of cherry picking in that I simply over-ride the best/worst days to 0%, so it isn’t a perfect model. However it does highlight the extraordinary contribution that just a few days make to the Bitcoin return profile.




For the 2024 chopsolidation, this chart assumes that a HODLer bought on the 1-Jan-2023. Despite all the chop, and all the boredom, that HODLer is still up +354%.

The quant trader has outperformed the HODLer by +45% (meh…), but the guy who tried to outsmart the market and missed the 10 best days has under-performed the HOLDer by -66%. He’s still up 120%…but it could have been +354% by doing nothing.




As a final note, when I compare the 10x worst days (red stars) in the chart above with my personal DCA buys over the last year, I realised that my HODLer instincts must have been kicking in.

Having been in Bitcoin for a while, you start to develop a sense for what days are bad days. More often than not, those bad days are when I prefer to stack my sats.

In many ways, I prefer to buy sats off the guy who has no edge, and thinks he will sell it now, and buy it back lower (think: STH-SOPR trading below 1.0).

(Note: I posted this chart in our Substack chart over the weekend for more details).




Closing Thoughts

This is by no means the perfect study, but it is one that really helped me understand and appreciate how Bitcoin trades. Most of the time, we have sub ±1% days, and the market goes nowhere.

In any 90 day period of time, 30 to 60 days are probably flat, boring, and choppy.

Day-traders are attempting to beat a three sided coin, and they have a 33% chance of being right (since only options traders can bet on sideways). The house always wins.

The humble HODLer on the other hand positions themselves DURING the chop, and preferably stacks their sats when there is blood in the streets.

Rather than spending countless hours and capital trying to build the perfect quant-algorithmic model, the vast majority of folks will probably do much better being bold and brave on the worst days, rather than trying to avoid them (and risk missing the best ones).

Thanks for reading,

James




Masterclass #10: Bull Market Onchain Primer
Rather than pretending I can predict the cycle top, I prefer to focus on investor behaviour, and spotting when the HODLers start selling the most coins. Then I'll check the price, and make a call.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
OCT 11, 2024
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

I sat down today with the intention of preparing a market update, covering yet another daily red candle. What I found, was that absolutely nothing has changed since my last few posts, and thus it would be yet another boring, choppy assessment.

If you wanted a refresh on my views, I’d recommend a revisit of Devil’s Advocate, Not So Fast, and A Full Tank of Gas, which capture the combined picture, as I see it.

We all know the next leg of the bull market will come around eventually, else we wouldn’t be here writing, reading and watching this newsletter.

So, instead of the same tired old chopsolidation commentary, I want to switch gears completely, and start looking ahead. While everyone else is feeling miserable, and hunting for reasons why the market is down, the Checkonchain crew are going to start putting in the necessary reps to pull ahead of everyone else.

In today’s post, we’re going to go over the mission critical concepts we will need to confidently navigate the bull market. My goal is to keep cool, and data-driven head when making decisions, especially when the euphoria narrative takes over.

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

Rather than pretending I can predict the cycle top, I prefer to focus on investor behaviour, and spotting when the HODLers are selling the most coins. Then I will check the price, and the date.
MVRV-Z Score helps us gauge when the average BTC holder is getting hilariously rich, and the incentives are starting to shift deeper into profit taking territory.
Contrary to popular narratives, HODLers absolutely sell coins, and we can track when they do so using Long-Term Holder supply, Coindays and Realised Profit.
At the same time HODLers are taking the fattest profits, gamblers are going levered long at the absolute top, providing a masterclass in what not to do.
Full Premium Video


Top Forming Mechanics

As an ex-engineer, I tend to approach my analysis by breaking the problem down into small components, and then rebuilding the machine. I do not anchor to a specific date, nor a specific price target for where I expect the cycle top to be.

I prefer to look for the incentives, and investor behaviours which are top forming, and then I will look at the calendar, and the price.

What would I expect to see at the next bull cycle peak?

Investors will be sitting on huge unrealised gains.
The smart money will be deep into their divestment, and taking heavy profits.
Insane long-biased leverage will build up in futures and options markets.
The supply will be increasingly held by new ‘dumb money’ investors with a high cost basis.
The narrative will be infinitely bullish, with no top or ceiling in sight.
For bonus points: Zombie companies (including public miners) will likely try and pull a Saylor, by putting BTC on the balance sheet as a last ditch survival effort.
One of the magical benefits of onchain data, is that we can see just about all of these dynamics, as they happen, and make decisions accordingly. The trick is, I want to find periods where there is confluence between multiple factors…

…and go into hiding when they all light up like a Christmas tree.

Note, for today’s piece, I am only going to cover on the first three items, covering Unrealised profit, HODLer sell-side, and extreme futures leverage.

Seeking Confluence

One of the simplest overview tools is the Cycle Extreme Signal, which looks at four components of the Bitcoin market, and returns a +1 or -1 value if that metric reaches a statistical extreme.

This tool is a great starting point, as it can help us narrow down which metric categories we want to check, based on what is lighting up (or what isn’t):

🟢 MVRV: flags when the average investor is sitting on a large unrealised gains.
🟡 SOPR: flags when the average investor is locking in large profit multiples.
🔵 Puell Multiple: flags when miners are making way too much money.
🔴 Reserve Risk: flags when HODLers have divested significantly their stacks.
Notice how all four components are somewhat different in what drives them, but they all describe a point from our expectations for what sets a bull market top.




Live Chart
Sitting on Fat Gains

Who remembers this absolute gem of a headline, published at the exact pico-top of the ETH/USD chart in 2018?




Little did we know back then, but the MVRV Ratio was disgustingly high when the journalist started writing this piece, and was dropping like a stone on the day of publication (indicating the top was in).

The MVRV Ratio describes the average unrealised profit held per unit of BTC, and when the average investor is your uber driver…no bueno.

For most people, the MVRV Z-Score is likely to be the most useful version, as we can use horizontal levels, and it measures statistical deviations from the long-term mean.

Generally speaking, I become cautious when MVRV-Z exceeds 1.0σ, and extremely careful once it gets above 1.5σ.




Live Chart
Why did I pick 1.0σ and 1.5σ as my threshold levels?

If we look at the historical distribution of MVRV-Z during bull markets, these values give me an 80% to 90% probability that the metric is excessively high. The market can keep running higher for sure, but the odds only deteriorate the higher it goes.

When a metric has only been at a level during 10% of the most euphoric trading days…it is probably not going to stay there for very long.

It is very important to remember that price during the euphoria phase of a bull, can keep going much higher, and much longer than you expect. This is particularly painful if you have just sold a chunk (and feel FOMO), or if you just decided to buy (top buyer).

For me, once MVRV-Z enters the orange and red zones, Check the HODLer is NOT a Bitcoin buyer…I have made this mistake once (or twice) too many times.




Live Chart
For extra points, we can use the NUPL by Cohort chart, which helps spot when MVRV for multiple investor groups are rocketing into space. For reference, NUPL is just a different way to plot out MVRV, and it has a similar interpretation.

The chart below will flag yellow —> orange —> red as more cohorts see their unrealised gains grow to statistically extreme levels.

When everyone is getting hilariously rich…




Live Chart
Reading an oscillator may not be an overly intuitive exercise for some folks. Fortunately, we can also convert extreme MVRV readings into a price, since MVRV is simply a multiple of the Realised Price.

The chart below translates these extreme MVRV levels back into prices, so I can start to plan and prepare for when I need to exercise heightened caution.

Rather than trying to predict the top, this models out a level where it becomes increasingly likely, that everyone is hilariously rich…and I can then make my decisions with this in mind.




Live Chart
To wrap up this section on extreme Unrealised Profit, let’s consult the Short-Term Holder bollinger bands. In a bull, we can reasonably expect the HODLer cohort to be sitting on fat gains, since they never sell…(more on this shortly).

But when the portfolio of every dude who bought his first Bitcoin yesterday is also sitting of fat stacks, that is a major red flag.

The Short-Term Holder Bollinger Bands helps me identify when the market is starting to get a little silly. This tool is effective at finding both local, and global tops, and it tends to be a more responsive and fast compared to MVRV.

When the price is at excessive MVRV-Z value, AND trading above the upper STH-Bollinger bands, this is unlikely to be a sustainable situation.




Live Chart
HODLers Never Sell…(hint: they do)

Forget all the bullish nonsense you hear about people HODLing every coin forever, because Bitcoin is the best, and fiat is the worst.

Bitcoin is the best, fiat is the worst, but the narrative that HODLers don’t sell is complete bullshit.

Everyone has their price for some portion of their holdings, and accepting this as a reality, de-clutters my thinking about the market.

Check the HODLer has his personal strategy and goals for what to do with my Bitcoin savings. I expect to HODL 90-95% of it indefinitely, but I also don’t particularly want to go through another full scale bear market fully exposed. My savings are there to materially improve my life, and I will trade some of my BTC for the thing I want (for me, it’s a house to live in).
Check the Analyst wants to know when lots of HODLers are selling, because that is precisely the sell-side pressure which overwhelms demand, and puts in the top.
HODLers absolutely sell, and that is ok, so long as I know roughly when it is happening, and can make my decisions accordingly.

For exhibit A, we have a nifty little indicator that shows when Long-Term Holder supply decreased for 7 consecutive days. This means that the spending behaviour by LTHs is ramping up, and is a continuous stream of coins that must be soaked up, at increasingly high prices.

Notice how these guys tend to sell the most near the top…funny that.




Live Chart
Exhibit B is the massive uptick in coinday destruction (CDD), which measures the volume of ‘holding time’ that is flushed out of the system.

This particular chart shows the 90-day sum of CDD, and surprise surprise…Long-Term Holders (blue) usually sell the biggest volumes of old coins near cycle tops.

I’m starting to see a pattern developing!




Live Chart
Q: Why would a HODLer ever sell their precious Bitcoin for fiat bro?

A: Because he is in profit, bro.

We’re all human, and at some stage in our Bitcoin journey, we will all look at the big green number and think…crikey mate, that’s quite a lot.

When one guy takes profit, it is just day-to-day noise.

On the other hand, when the people who were brave enough to buy during the horror-show of the last bear market, and hardcore enough to HODL through the chopsolidation…when they start taking profits, that is information.

Realised profit volumes reaching statistically high levels is about as clean a signal of heavy sell-side pressure as you can get. At the end of the day, HODLers taking profit is THE top signal we are all looking for, and I can’t help but notice they are getting remarkably good at selling near the highs.




Live Chart
As a result of massive profit taking volumes, the market will start to become unstable. The narrative on twitter at this time will be that there is no top, and the day of fiat reckoning is upon us!

It might be, but it also might just be the top.

Very high Sell-side Risk Ratios indicate when the market is a very long way from equilibrium, and it is increasingly unlikely to continue on its current upwards trajectory.




Live Chart
Longing the Top in Style

We’ve all done it, and buying the top is a rite of passage in markets.

However, some folks do it bigger and badder than others.

They long the top, and they do so with leverage.

These folks are the dumb money speculators, they are often willing to pay ridiculous interest rates (50%+) to take on long-leverage at the worst possible time. When I see this behaviour, I really have to question why I would be a buyer at those prices.

The chart below shows the total USD value that is paid in interest by long-side futures traders each day. Whilst there is no hard and fast rule on how big this can get, alarm bells should be ringing when we start seeing it trade over $5M/day.




Live Chart
The final insight for the day, is actually one of my personal favourites.

Futures funding rates, and onchain SOPR are the same metric!

Funding rates describe the directional bias of leveraged traders (buyers).
SOPR describes the profitability of existing holders transacting in spot markets (sellers).
These two metrics tell us a strikingly similar story, but from two completely different perspectives, and from two very different markets. At the same time that spot holders are taking the biggest profit multiples, the dumb money speculator is betting the farm on green…

This is just the kind of top-forming confluence we’re looking for.




Live Chart
Closing Thoughts

I truly hope that today’s post gives everyone something new and fresh to think about. Whilst the market is a boring-ass chop-fest, I felt it was a good time to start preparing our tool belts for the future, which will inevitably show up.

Like any good training routine, you will get the best results when you start preparing months before the event, not on the eve of the fight.

The secret sauce to finding tops, is by NOT trying to predict it.

Instead, I will be looking for periods when dumb investors are getting hilariously rich, going levered long to capitalise on it, and are simultaneously being dumped on by the HODLers who bought the bear market lows.

When I see these behaviours, then I will check the price, and the calendar.

Until then, I stay humble, stack sats, and HODL on.

Thanks for reading folks, and have a great weekend,

James


Masterclass #11: Paper Bitcoin - The Role of Derivatives
Plenty of folks like to claim derivatives are actively suppressing the Bitcoin price, and keeping it down. Too few are talking about the critical role they play in making the number go up.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
OCT 18, 2024
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

If your journey is anything like mine, you probably had no idea what a futures market, or an options contract was until you became a Bitcoiner. The role and influence of derivatives has skyrocketed since the last cycle, and they remain a highly misunderstood component of market structure.

Open interest in futures markets is currently approaching an ATH when priced in BTC, and is back to levels comparable with the final days before FTX imploded.

For everyone with PTSD from the last cycle, where deleveraging events routinely wiped -50% off our net worth, this is likely setting off a few alarm bells.




Live Chart
In today’s post, I want to address the topic of ‘paper Bitcoin’, which is a crowd favourite topic for salty-goldbugs, bored Bitcoiners, and engagement farmers alike.

I will explore some of the important market dynamics which make derivatives so critical for Bitcoin’s market structure, and are often overlooked in the campaigns and claims of ‘price suppression’ keeping the corn down.

I will even argue, that without derivatives, the number probably won’t go up.

If you’re relatively new to the world of derivatives, basis trades, and cash & carry trades, I would encourage a read/watch of Cash & Carry Confusion (free), and Leverage and Boredom (paid) for an introduction to this topic.

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

The derivatives markets are huge, accounting for $63B in value, split between futures ($39B) and options ($24B). Interestingly, the global derivatives market is growing in line with Bitcoin, ranging between 4% and 5% of its market cap.
A growing derivatives market is a natural response to a growing asset class. However, without a deep and liquid derivatives market, the growth of the asset is very likely to be capped.
The reason is that big money require the ability to manage and hedge risk, else they simply cannot allocate large sums of capital.
At $1.3 Trillion in size, Bitcoin is now of a scale where the humble retail HODLer is unlikely to drive the market substantially higher. This requires big institutional capital, and they require a deep and liquid derivatives market to enter.
Lot’s of folks talk about ‘paper Bitcoin’ suppressing the price. Too few talk about how deep and liquid derivatives are an enabler for number go up.

Full Premium Video


Levering Up

To kick things off, let’s start with a view on how large the Bitcoin derivatives markets are. Without doubt, the recent uptick in futures leverage is breathtaking, driving the USD denominated open interest at a new ATH of $39.3B.

Generally speaking, higher open interest means there is more leverage in the system, which can create more volatile price swings as traders get margin called via short or long squeezes.




Live Chart
If we add in the $24B in open interest held in the options markets, we end up with a global open interest value of $63.2B, pretty significant.

Whilst this global open interest metric is not an ATH, it is not too far from it. Remember, this is only capturing the open interest which we have transparent data for, and there is no doubt more out there in bespoke contracts.

As an aside, notice how derivatives tend to grow in size alongside the price…more on this later.




Live Chart
At face value, it would appear that this describes a HUGE volume of ‘price suppressing paper Bitcoin’ claims circulating out there!

Get the pitchforks!

There are a few important concepts to keep in mind when thinking about derivatives:

Derivatives provide large investors, and primary producers tools to hedge portfolio and income risk, by handing that risk off to speculators.
This is precisely why futures were invented for commodities markets, to help transfer the price risk of wheat from the farmer (who wants predictable income), to the market (who take on risk, and forecast / bet on future volatility).
Every asset which reaches an appreciable size (hundreds of billions in market cap) will develop a large derivatives market.
Without a deep and liquid derivatives market, the growth of an asset will forever be capped, as institutional capital cannot enter since they can’t hedge their risk.
If we take a step back, it becomes quite obvious that derivatives are an inevitable, and necessary part of a maturing Bitcoin market. Without them, big money cannot allocate big dollars, since they can’t effectively manage their risk.

If we take that global $63.2B in derivatives open interest and compare it to the Bitcoin market cap, notice how it has been flat and stable at ~4% to 5% since 2022.

In other words, the derivatives market is growing at the same pace as Bitcoin.




Live Chart
Bitcoin is now a $1.3T asset, and as important as the humble retail HODLer has been to its growth, we are reaching the limits of how much influence we can really have.

The chart below shows the relative supply held by Shrimp (< 1BTC) and Crabs (1 to 10 BTC). Notice how the balance of both has stalled out in 2023-24.

There are many reasons for this, but two which I believe are the most dominant are:

Our retail sized dollars just don’t stack the same coin they used to. I miss the good old days where 0.1 BTC was just a few stacks away…whereas now its is a multi-month target, and an achievement when you get there.
Many long-term retail HODLers have been stacking for years, and are approaching a phase in their life where they are starting families, buying a house, and otherwise have new life commitments. Many are now in the ‘sitting comfortably in spot’ phase of their journey, and new buys have a marginal impact on their stacks.
All of this is to say that Bitcoin now needs big money to move it higher.

We’re beyond the scale where humble retail HODLers can push this beast to $10T, and thus we need institutional capital, and that capital requires deep and liquid derivatives to manage their risk.




Live Chart
Growing Up

This is a process of growing up, and maturing as an asset class.

Historically speaking, high leverage in futures markets was a sign of impending doom, as a huge wash out of degenerate traders was just over the horizon.

If we look just at the last 2-weeks, we can see that leverage is absolutely piling on as the market climbs higher.

The default assumption of a 2021 analyst is ‘holy shit, she’s gonna blow!’




Live Chart
But wait a second…funding rates are still at pretty benign levels.

Why isn’t there an egregiously excessive long bias? It’s positive sure, but only marginally above the exchange default settings.

What if this new leverage isn’t coming from the classic crypto-native, liquidation prone, degenerate casino perp exchanges?…




Live Chart
If we look at open interest dominance, the global market share of exchanges like Binance, Bitmex, and Bybit are actually in a multi-year decline. Crypto-native exchanges used to account for 90% of open interest, and this has fallen below 70%. They are still large, but this is a trend of gradually reducing influence.

There is only one exchange that is not shown in this chart, and it is responsible for the entire market share growth…

The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME).




Live Chart
The CME Group exchange is the 800-pound gorilla in the TradFi derivatives world, and their share of Bitcoin futures contracts has ripped to over 31% over recent years. If we wind back the clock to late-2022, their dominance was sitting at just 12%.

The dominance of institutional futures has increased 3x over two years.

This is clear cut evidence that Bitcoin derivatives markets are evolving, and moving towards more institutional players. Futures markets are getting deeper, more liquid, and increasingly sophisticated.




Live Chart
Slowing Down

A byproduct of growing up, is that we start to slow down.

I’m in my early 30’s, and whilst I make sure to look after my fitness and health, I certainly recognise that I don’t have the same agility I did in my 20’s.

Bitcoin is getting older, and bigger. In physics, objects of a large size and mass require larger forces to get them moving. Once they get moving however, these markets also have more inertia, which is why gold can add $6.1T to its market cap in 2yrs!

Even though goldbugs have been banging on about price suppression, and paper gold for decades, this shows that once the ball starts rolling, with a serious spot bid from eastern central banks, it really gets going.

The key difference between Gold and Bitcoin however, is that self-custody, and onchain verification makes excessive paper Bitcoin much harder to execute in practice. We can see the balance of the ETFs onchain, and take custody of our spot holdings.

The Bitcoin market has far more capacity to call bullshit compared to the gold which may, or may not be sitting in vaults in London.




Live Chart
A significant amount of the recent spot ETF inflows, appear to be paired with a CME futures short position. The chart below shows 30-day ETF inflows in green, and compares it with the 30-day change in CME open interest.

This is the Cash & Carry trade, and it is a very common yield capture strategy deployed by hedge funds, and trading desks.

The idea is they long spot (via the ETFs), and then short sell a CME futures contract which is trading at a premium to spot. If they sit on this position, they effectively get ‘paid to wait’, and can roll the position whenever the futures contract expires.

The part most of the ‘price suppression’ gang miss, is that the reason this trade is possible at all, is because a premium already exists in the futures market.

Other people are bidding up the price because they expect higher prices.




Live Chart
Why did we get a sudden influx of both ETF inflows, and CME open interest this week?

The annualised premium has increased from 8% a week ago, to over 12% today for contracts expiring in December. Given the Fed is entering a rate cutting cycle, a simple yield strategy which captures 2.5x more than the ‘risk-free-rate’ is obviously very attractive.

But Check, this is ‘paper Bitcoin’, and it is surely suppressing the price!?




Live Chart
Number Go Up

We’re now approaching the punchline of this piece.

At the end of the day, derivatives are a tool to transfer risk from one party to another. They offer leverage and margin, which allows speculators to use a cash or collateral to take a directional bet on the price, and also capture any yield available from futures premium.

For options, one mans portfolio insurance is another mans income generating strategy. When one guy makes a directional bet long, another miner is able to hedge their future BTC income.

Derivatives are complex, but ultimately they are an essential component of a market which is growing up. Without them, miners cannot hedge risk, speculators can’t take on risk, and big money managers cannot allocate big money.

To add some nuance to the topic of paper Bitcoin:

If the spot markets are fought with sticks and stones, then the leveraged derivatives markets are fought with machine guns.
The thing is, both the bulls and the bears have them, which is a fact the folks claiming ‘price suppression’ often neglect.
The cash & carry trade requires the purchase of spot Bitcoin, even if it is being balanced by a short CME futures trade.
This creates volume on the ETFs too, which makes it easier for investors to buy in, as they know there will be a deep bid if and when they need to exit.
The reason there is a premium to capture at all, is because there is sufficient long-biased capital pushing the CME futures price up in the first place.
One could argue that pure CME futures traders are playing in paper bitcoin, and are essentially just betting on the price.
These CME traders are the very speculators who are taking risk away from the miners, the portfolio managers, and the pension funds hedging their books.
When options roll out on the Bitcoin ETFs, a whole new world of volatility capture and risk hedging strategies opens up.
All of these dynamics work towards creating deep, liquid, and highly traded derivatives markets.
Without a deep, liquid, and highly traded derivatives market, big capital cannot, and will not allocate big capital to the asset in the first place.

The end result is that the ability for big money to hedge risk, earn yield, and capture volatility makes Bitcoin an increasingly attractive asset to hold in the big money portfolio.

Closing Thoughts

I see so much banter around paper Bitcoin, and price suppression, and it is almost always a result of bored investors wondering why their number won’t go up.

I don’t see anybody talking about how essential deep and liquid derivatives markets are for enabling big capital to enter the space in the first place. I don’t see anyone talking about how a bigger derivatives market is correlated with a bigger Bitcoin.

My thesis is that we are currently sitting in the estuary, where the fresh water of the retail HODLer meets the giant pool of salt water that is the ocean of traditional markets. It takes time to hand the baton off for the next leg of this race, but once it gets going, the train won’t be stopped anytime soon.

Yes, there is ‘paper Bitcoin’.

But there always will be, and frankly there has to be for markets to become big and efficient. The key difference between Bitcoin and gold, is that the market can call bullshit, since we can see the coins held onchain, and trivially take ownership on the first sign of funny business.

In my opinion, folks complaining about ‘paper Bitcoin’ keeping their coin price down are missing the most important factor.

Without them, we’re going to have a hard time making the number go up.

Derivatives open interest is at ATHs after all, and the price chart looks like this…




Live Chart
Thanks for reading and have a great weekend,

James


Masterclass #20: A Moving Target (Onchain Pricing Models)
Many onchain derived pricing models are moving targets, driven by the dynamic flow of capital in and out of Bitcoin. Today I explore the underlying mechanics of what makes our price targets climb.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
DEC 17, 2024
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

In Bitcoin bear markets, we usually have a pretty good gauge of demand, since the HODLers often step in near the lows. What we don’t know much about is the supply side, and who needs to be shaken out. We can gauge the pain threshold which wipes out speculators, but supply is the major unknown in bears.

In a Bitcoin bull market, everything is reversed. We can measure sell-side supply, and also estimate the profit threshold when sellers become engaged. But we have no idea who is going to hit the big green button, when, and with how much size. In bull markets, demand is the major unknown.

I often split the Bitcoin market into two fundamental components:

Underlying fundamentals such as measurable capital in/outflows, with the Realised Cap being the most obvious metric for this.
Speculative premium as the market tried to re-find equilibrium in bull, or bear markets. Price, and the market cap is the most obvious metric here.
When the speculative premium diverges too far and too fast from the underlying fundamentals, that is usually when reversals happen.

Since we’re in a ripping bull market, the reversal most folks are looking for is the fabled ‘top’. We have pricing models which help estimate when heavy sell-side is engaged, but we also have to account for the inflow of new demand.

The Bitcoin top is a moving target, so let’s dig into what makes it move!

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary and video update below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

The Realised cap provides a backbone metric for measuring real capital inflows and outflows for Bitcoin. When a coin is acquired at $10k, and sold at $100k later on, the buyer must come up with the additional $90k in value (a capital inflow).
Based on both net capital flows, and a set of momentum oscillators I track, Bitcoin is actually in a pretty decent spot, and feels stable all things considered.
In terms of the balance of wealth held within the network, around 55% is currently held by Short Term Holders. The maximum speculator saturation point at prior cycle tops has this metric closer to 85%+, but the move from here to there can be quick, taking only 3-months in 2021.
Profits are being taken, but demand keeps soaking it up. This describes a fairly sound equilibrium between fundamental and speculative premium. As a result, the market is grinding higher, although is increasingly stretched the higher it goes.
The fundamental ‘value floor’, at least to my eye, is somewhere around $60k right now. I find it very difficult to build a strong case that we deserve to trade meaningfully lower as a result, and any prices back in the chopsolidation range, I would personally consider to be a modern high, to deep value zone (wild right!).
The topping price models still suggest another leg up to perhaps $120k to $150k is well within reason, however at that time, almost every onchain model will be flashing red like a Christmas tree.
My instinct tells me we are still likely to have an explosive end of year / start to 2025, but I can’t help but think the Trump inauguration is an obvious near-term ‘sell-the-news’ event. Sometimes the market just needs a focal point, after which the market can to re-find equilibrium for a while (and such an event would be extremely healthy to see).



Masterclass #13: Rethinking Bears
Bull markets author the bear that follows. With this as our guiding principle, let's explore how a modern Bitcoin bear may not look quite like those we've encountered in prior cycles.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
JAN 24, 2025
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

This cycle is different, but it is also very much the same. Some of the key topics which make this cycle different to prior ones:

The launch of the ETFs (which are the most successful ever).
The entry of serious institutional investors and capital.
The emergence of Bitcoin as a political asset of interest.
The widening divergence between Bitcoin, and crypto, where the orange coin appears to have crossed the Rubicon of wider acceptance. Crypto on the other hand continues to struggle working out what the product-market-fit is.
However, there are many elements which are the same, ranging from the stark similarities to the 2016-17 cycle, price performance since FTX, and of course, our emotional response to fear and greed.

There is no shortage of speculation about whether this cycle will be different in the bull. There always is.

What not enough people are talking about is how things might be different in the bear market, which will eventually come out of hibernation.

The bull market will author the bear that follows.

This is my core summary of how I think about what could happen. Prior bears have seen maximum drawdowns of more than -76%. Imagine if we have already set the top at $109k…that would take price down to $26k…which I don’t believe any of us think is a probable outcome.

What if price ripped to $150k?…Bottom would be $36k, still not likely in my view.

In this piece, I want to take you on a journey through how I have arrived at my conclusion for where a bear market floor might form.

It will involve an exploration of the obscure onchain metric of Coinday Destruction, Cointime Economics, and a bet that I lost back in 2022…

Let’s go.




Live Chart
📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

As the Bitcoin market matures, and grows in size, I suspect the depth and severity of bear markets will evolve also.
Coindays are a fascinating onchain analysis primitive, and one I spent considerable time thinking about when developing the Cointime Economics framework with David Puell.
One of the core innovations of that work was developing the True Market Mean, which I believe is a better representation of the average cost basis for active investors than the Realised Price.
My base case is that the True Market Mean will act as a sort of floor model for future bear markets, and in this piece I introduce this idea so we can ponder it long before we need it.
Full Premium Video


A Quick Note on Executive Orders

Before we kick off, I wanted to share my thoughts on the Bitcoin related Executive Orders signed by President Trump over the last few days.

The full pardon of Ross Ulbricht was great to see, and I wish Ross all the very best with his long overdue freedom.
The ‘digital asset stockpile’ EO was a very expected result. As far as I understand, it authorises a committee to think about thinking about holding onto the ‘digital assets’ the US Government has already seized to date. I bucket this as more or less a nothing burger, and one the market had priced in.
The rescinding of SAB121 however, is a big deal. This strange accounting bulletin issued by the SEC, effectively prevented banks from custodying digital assets. They would have to hold cash reserves equal in value to the coins, making it prohibitively expensive to do. Repealing this silly thing has opened up the doors for banks to build out custody products, which like the ETFs, opens a new door of demand.
I believe the market has correctly accounted for, and priced in these events.

The hourly Bitcoin chart is complete chaos, and this is where our emotions live day to day.

The weekly and monthly price charts are in a beautiful Quiet and Trending uptrend, and this is where our decisions should live. Don’t let the day to day chop and noise get in the way of the big picture.

Bitcoin is in a great spot, we just need to embrace the chop.




Introducing Coindays

‘Bitcoindays’ are actually the first onchain metric which was ever theorised, way back on the BitcoinTalk forums in 2011. The concept was to weight each UTXO by its BTC value, multiplied by the time since it last moved.

The best way to think about a coinday, is it is a volume weight of ‘investor holding time’. If an investor holds 3 BTC for 1 year, their coin will have a weight of 3x365=1095 coindays.

In the mind bending exercise fellow analyst David Puell and I went through developing Cointime Economics, we broke coindays down into three different states:

Coindays Created (one unit is created per BTC, per day).
Coindays Destroyed (the total sum of coindays spent each day).
Coindays Stored (how many coindays remain in the system).



Cointime Economics Breakdown of Coinday States
Monitoring the age of the supply, and tracking coindays helps with all sorts of things in onchain analysis, but the big two are:

Allows us to develop cohorts which classify the supply by behaviour (e.g. Long/Short-Term Holders).
Provides a tool for spotting when older coins are starting to take profit in bull markets.
The chart below illustrates the second point, showing waves of coindays which are destroyed throughout a rolling 90-day window.

It is immediately obvious that large volumes of CDD occur in bull markets, signifying older coins are increasingly on the move as the price appreciates.




Live Chart
When we break CDD into those from Long-Term (blue) and Short-Term (red) Holders, it is obvious which cohort does the most work putting cycle tops in.

Long-Term Holders dominate CDD metrics, simply because they have HODLed longer, and harder than the average bear.




Live Chart
We can also break these down into Coindays Destroyed which were in profit or loss. From this, we can see the profit taking waves in a bull, and the acceleration of losses in a bear.

One interesting observation is that on the final capitulation wick in 2018, and when FTX blew up in 2022, notice the spike in profitable CDD.

Some people were so terrified, that they took profit at the bottom…fearing it would go lower.

Keep that concept in your back pocket for the bear season.




Live Chart
In my opinion, one of the best distillations of CDD into a cyclical metric was developed by my friend TXMC, and that is the Value Days Destroyed Multiple. He used a whole suite of transformation techniques which we use often in the onchain field, and developed a tool which looks at the momentum of Coinday Destruction.

The VDD Multiple is a great tool for spotting overheated conditions, as it clearly demarcates when old hands are distributing their oldest supply, in the biggest size.




Live Chart
So…Coins are Time?

One of the Easter eggs in the Cointime Economics report, is that my Bitcoin signature at the end of the document contains a hash for this ordinal, which correctly summarises how I felt when writing it up…

Inscription 98ffd17758330871f53a10b36b94a3f96739de69ec4db9e60b71b06a691fb6f1i0


This concept starts with Liveliness, which is a beautiful and elegant metric invented by a Bitcoin developer and pioneer, the late Tamás Blummer (who we dedicated the work to).

Liveliness is a macro metric which describes the ratio between all-time coindays created, and coindays destroyed.

 
At the current Liveliness value of 62.8%, this means that around two thirds of all the coindays which have ever been created, have been destroyed (leaving one third ‘stored’ in HODLed coins).

Liveliness tells the story of adoption for Bitcoin, where it has experienced two phases of life:

Genesis to 2017 - Lots of coins were lost in these early days, and the price of Bitcoin was small enough that nobody really cared that much. The great 2017 parabola, and the BCH hard-fork changed this, as everyone scrambled to find their old keys, sell the BCH dividend, and take profits.
2017 onwards has seen the market mature, wallets improve, and people started to look after their Bitcoin. It now had a non trivial value, and fewer coins were lost, whilst more of the supply started actively trading around the cycles.
The result of this second point is that Liveliness has been range-bound since the 2017 top, meaning a pretty consistent proportion of the coin supply remains active over time.




Live Chart
If we zoom into Liveliness over this period, suddenly we can see a lot more detail, and it starts to describe the dominant investor behaviour throughout market cycles:

Uptrends occur in bulls, as coindays are destroyed when investors take profits.
Downtrends occur in bears, as accumulation and HODLing returns as the dominant investor behaviour pattern.
Of particular interest, note that Liveliness is nearing the ATH set in the 2021 cycle, suggesting the market is arguably awash with active coins right now.

This should be of no surprise since we have covered the magnitude of Long-Term Holder selling throughout the 2024-25 market cycle. What is more impressive is Bitcoin has absorbed it, and is still trading above $100k!




Live Chart
So here comes the mind bender…

Since we can see how much of the Bitcoin network is active vs dormant using coindays, we can actually convert coindays this into a Supply based metric.

Let’s use extremes to inform the mean:

Satoshi’s coins (and lost coins) will only ever create coindays (since they cannot be spent to destroy them).
Exchange hot wallets churn the full balance all the time as they consolidate deposits and process withdrawals. They destroy 100% of their coindays often.
HODLers who trade the cycles are somewhere in between, with lots of coindays stored, and some fraction spent and sold in the bull.
If we take a blended average of this behaviour (aka Liveliness), we can estimate what proportion of the coin supply is Active vs Vaulted (stored/HODLed).

The chart below shows this weird transformation, and the two supply regions (Active/Vaulted Supply). Notice how Vaulted Supply has been largely flat since the 2017 peak. That means the newly mined coins since then are by and large NOT LOST, and the effective Active Supply is at a new ATH of 12.45M BTC.

This is one of many pieces of evidence that runs counter to the ‘supply shock’ nonsense folks bang on about, especially in relation to exchange balances.

Yes, Bitcoin is scarce and finite in supply. But fewer coins are truly lost in modern times, and an ATH of 12.45M BTC are actively traded around cycle after cycle.




Live Chart
When we look at the 30-day change in Vaulted Supply (think deep cold storage + lost coins), we can now see the accumulation (green) and distribution (red) cycles.

During bull markets, long HODLed coins, which have accumulated large coinday reserves come back to life. Vaulted Supply declines, and new demand becomes saturated.

The VDD Multiple flags overheated conditions…but nobody believes it…because euphoria is a powerful drug.

Coindays are the answer!?…




Live Chart
Check…Where Are You Going With All This…

As I said, this stuff is obscure, but we’re getting to the punchline now.

One of the biggest developments from the Cointime Economics research was the True Market Mean price, which in my opinion, should replace the Realised Price.

The Realised Price is the average cost basis of every coin in the supply, which means it includes the $0 cost basis of over 1.9 million coins from the early years that have never moved (likely lost).
The True Market Mean uses Liveliness to adjust this, discounting lost coins, and focusing instead on the average cost basis of ACTIVE INVESTORS.
Approximately 10% of the Bitcoin Supply was mined before we had a price (or at a price of a few cents), but never transacted. Common wisdom in bear markets is that the price should trade below the Realised Price cost basis, which it has done in all cycles so far.

However, when The Spot Price = Realised Price (and MVRV = 1.0), that technically means the market is technically at the break-even level.

But this isn’t really true. In 2018, those lost coins held an unrealised profit of $8.8B, and in 2023 it was $37.6B.

In order for the market to be break-even…some collection of poor souls, who were active in the cycle are holding billions in unrealised losses to offset the profit held by lost coins!

The problem with the Realised Price, is it masks the damage done to active investors, who actually respond to market conditions.




Live Chart
The solution Dave and I developed was the True Market Mean Price.

Back in the 2022 bear cycle, I actually had a $100 bet with my friend and fellow Glassnode analyst CryptoVizArt, that we wouldn’t visit the Realised Price that cycle…

If it wasn’t for the LUNA + 3AC + FTX shitshow…I might be $100 richer…

However, think about how savage and brutal the deleveraging and outright fraud had to be to get us down that far. Unless we have a similar set of circumstances (which is increasingly unlikely as the market matures), I don’t think the Realised Price will become a target in the next bear cycle.

This also means the MVRV Ratio is likely to drift and lose signal over time.

Thus, my base case is that the True Market Mean (and the AVIV Ratio) are more likely to become the psychological floor for bear markets in the future.

This thesis still has to be tested, but this is how I am thinking about it currently.




Live Chart
Let’s allow ourselves to speculate (not predict) for a moment.

As you know, my ‘Topping Cloud’ for where the average HODLer is in a significant amount of profit is between $120k and $150k. Statistically speaking, only 4% of trading days have seen the base metrics extend beyond an implied price of $150k.

Imagine we shoot up to $150k tomorrow, and that signals THE TOP.

Price falling back to the Realised Price at $42k would be a -72% drawdown, and more of less a repeat of the past cycle pattern. This would be a complete reversal of all appreciation since the ETFs launched…and would also mean Bitcoin drops below a $1 Trillion valuation.
I personally struggle to see this as a high likelihood scenario (not impossible, but not likely either).
Price falling back to the True Market Mean at $62.5k would be a -58% drawdown, and be a retest of the multi-month chopsolidation range. We have a huge supply cluster still located at that level, and we’ve covered this as a possibility in Eyeing an Air-Pocket.
Personally, this is a scenario I consider plausible, albeit probably a bit extreme. I would certainly be stacking sats with both hands if this happened, and I suspect there would be many others who view it the same way.
Whilst none of this is a prediction, I can reasonably construct a fundamental case for the True Market Mean being the REAL cost basis of the market, and a potential target for the later stages of a future bear market.




Live Chart
Concluding Thoughts

Some of you might be wondering why on earth I am talking about a bear market now?

In many ways, I feel like onchain data gives us a toolkit to dissect various cross sections of the market, and think through probabilities of what may or may not happen. At the core, these price levels are derived from the activity, HODLing behaviour, and cost basis levels of everyone holding spot corn.

Thus, if I can start thinking through areas of interest long ahead of time, I can start planning for, and testing my thesis BEFORE the volatility strikes.

It is much harder to develop a bear market thesis when you encounter it alone in the woods…

As Bitcoin evolves further into a global macro asset, more and more serious people own and hold it. These institutional players are not paper hands, and I don’t think it is unreasonable to expect the drawdowns will be less severe moving forwards.

The True Market Mean will also climb as profits are taken, making it a Moving Target, so we can assess where it is located as the cycle progresses.

I’ll never get my $100 back from VizArt, but I consider it an invaluable investment, as I’ve been pondering this idea ever since.

Thanks for reading,

James

Looking for an Onchain Data API?

My friend The Bitcoin Researcher has just rolled out a new API for Bitcoin onchain data which has just about every metric you’d want. I’ve had a few folks reach out looking for API access, and I highly recommend checking this service out if you’re interested in playing with the underlying data feeds.


Masterclass #14: The Law of Large Numbers
Bitcoin is growing up, and in order to run up to higher prices, we will necessarily require larger capital inflows...and the numbers are starting to get very big indeed.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
JAN 28, 2025
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

Bitcoin is a big boy now.

With a market cap of over $2 Trillion, Bitcoin is the largest cryptoasset (by far), the 6th largest base money, and the 7th largest global asset.

However, Bitcoin is also a very small fish swimming in a very large pond, representing just 0.2% of total global asset classes.




We’re in this funny spot where relative to Bitcoins history, the current size and scale are absolutely gargantuan. We’re seeing regular $500M inflow days into the ETFs, and those represent just a fraction of the total market of supply and demand.

At the same time, a single Bitcoin is worth $100k+, and a 50% price move from here would represent a $1 Trillion increase in the market cap.

As Bitcoin grows, we will need increasingly large sums of capital to push the market to new altitudes. Things move slower up here, and yet the doors have now opened to considerably larger pools of capital.

In today’s post, I will make an attempt to size up the current Bitcoin market. The goal is to try and gauge how much capital we’d need to enter the space in order to achieve price targets of $150k and above.

Let’s explore the law of large numbers.

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

As Bitcoin gets bigger, we obviously need larger sized capital inflows to push the market higher, and then to stay there.
Since the cycle low was set by the implosion of FTX, approximately $442B has flowed in via the Realised Cap, with $40B of this associated with the ETFs.
In Dispelling the 118x Multiplier Myth, I developed my best estimate for how much $1 invested in Bitcoin changes the Market Cap (typically by around $2 to $5 depending on market conditions).
Using these frameworks, in order for the market to rally +50%, and reach a price of $150k ($3T MCap), we may need $250B+ of capital to flow into Bitcoin.
For a sense of relative scale, this would mean the ETFs may have to double in total inflows in order to achieve that move (plausible, but no small feat).
Full Premium Video


Realised Reference Point

I want to start with the Realised Cap, which is the backbone metric of onchain analysis. The Realised Cap is best thought of as the total invested value in Bitcoin, and real adoption occurs when it is in an uptrend.

My simple framework for thinking about the Realised Cap is as follows:

If you acquired 2 BTC at a price of $25k, you invested $50k worth of value.
That value remains ‘saved’ at that price until you spend and move the coin.
Given the vast majority of onchain volume is flowing in and out of exchanges, we can simplify the world and assume spends are approximately buys and sells.
If you sold those 2 BTC at $100k, you realise a fiat gain of 2 x $75k = $150k, and those coins are revalued to the new cost basis (assigned to the buyer).
This represents a net capital inflow of $150k into Bitcoin.
Even with all the error bars around self-spends and wallet management, the Realised Cap remains a remarkably accurate tool to measure capital inflows.

I checked this assumption using Entity-Adjusted data in my time at Glassnode, and the deviation due to self-spends etc is less than 5%, a rounding error for our purposes.

On the day FTX imploded, marking the low for our cycle, the Realised Cap was around $400B. Since then, it has increased by 110%, hitting an ATH of $842B.

In other words, since FTX blew up, a total of $442B has entered Bitcoin, based on how coins have been revalued higher (profit taking by the seller, and new demand by the buyer).




Live Chart
The chart below shows the relative change in the Realised Cap over the last three cycles. Credit to my brilliant analysts at Glassnode (UkuriaOC and CryptoVizArt) for the inspiration coming up with this chart.

From this, we can assess how much the Realised Cap increased since the cycle low of each cycle. We can then deduce how much net capital flowed into Bitcoin by the time the cycle peaked.

🟢 2015-17 Cycle: Realised Cap increased by 21x (+2,000%).
🔵 2020-21 Cycle: Realised Cap increased 4.6x (+360%).
⚫ 2023-25 Cycle: Realised Cap is up 2.1x so far (+110%).
Now given this cycles Realised Cap started at $400B, in order to reach 2021 cycle levels, it would have to reach a value of $1.84 Trillion, which is an additional capital inflow of $1.0T from where we are today.

In order to reach levels equivalent to the 2017 cycle…$7 Trillion…

This is not a measure of market cap. This means we’d need $7 Trillion in profit taking, and thus supply absorbed to match the 2017 run…not likely anytime soon.




Live Chart
The Multiplier Effect

Back in May last year, I released a study of the ‘multiplier effect’, as an attempt to dispel what I believed to be a complete nonsense story about 100x multipliers.

The idea of a multiplier is that for every $1 invested into (or extracted from) an asset, it tends to have an outsized impact on the market cap. Market Cap is just the last traded price times supply, and the entire coins supply doesn’t transact at every price.

I won’t rehash the details of that study here, although it’s worth a revisit if you missed it. One of the key takeaways from that work is the chart below, which compares how much capital needs to flow into the Realised Cap in order to create some change in the Market Cap.

By my best estimate, every $1 invested in Bitcoin has around a 2x to 5x multiplier on the market cap in typical conditions.

This changes during periods of higher and lower liquidity, but is a far cry from the 100x many seem to believe (read: engagement farm with).

So, given we have seen around $442B invested into the Bitcoin Realised Cap since the cycle low, we’d expect around a $1.3T (3x) to $2.2T (5x) increase in the market cap. We started 2023 at $330B and are now $2.0T, adding ~$1.7T which is a 5x on our starting position.

Checks out on the back of the envelope.




Live Chart
So now let’s return to a more familiar chart, which is the price performance since the cycle low. Now we have the following numbers to work with:

A starting Realised Cap of $400B and price of $15.6k when FTX imploded.
A current market cap of $2 Trillion.
Assume a capital multiplier of 3x for a middle of the road estimate.
If the price was to absolutely giga-rip, and follow the 2017 cycle until the top, we would in theory hit a 111x price multiple, meaning $1.7M per BTC, and a Market Cap of $33.6T. This would mean the market cap increases by $31.6T, and would require 31.6/3 = $10.5 Trillion in net capital inflows into the Realised Cap!

To follow the 2021 Cycle, price would have to reach $312k, and a Market cap of $6.2T. These numbers FEEL more tangible, but that would still require around $1.4T of real capital to flow into Bitcoin at a 3x multiplier. Not impossible, but a big number (3.3x more than has flowed in since FTX blew up)

If we get to the $150k price where most onchain models will be overheated, that puts the market cap at $3 Trillion, and would require around $333B in new capital inflow.

If we assume a more bullish 5x multiplier, that number drops to $200B (both of these feel quite plausible).

The take home story in my mind is that a 50% price move to $150k may seem small relative to prior cycles, but it still requires hundreds of billions in new capital to get there.

Small Fish, Big Pod.




Live Chart
Keeping Perspective

Dealing with large numbers is quite difficult for our minds. A few million dollars is both a life changing sum…and barely gets you a single bedroom apartment here in Australia.

A billion dollars is more than any of us could spend in a lifetime, and yet $40B have flowed into the Bitcoin ETFs since they launched.

The Bitcoin market cap has increased by $1.94 Trillion since march 2020…with all history up to that point making up the remaining $0.06 Trillion (just 3%).

Let’s make the following final assumptions:

The ETFs represent around 20% (one fifth) of the demand profile (based on this chart), and have seen $40B in inflows so far.
In order to reach a price of $150k, we may need a capital inflow of between $250B (5x) and $333B (3x).
That means if the ETFs inflows to date were to double (i.e. additional +$40B inflows), the total BTC demand estimate would be around $200B (40x5).
In order to reach a price of $150k, a mere 50% price move, this market may well require the ETFs to more than double their current inflow size!

Certainly not impossible, but no small feat either.




Live Chart
Concluding Thoughts

This exercise is very much my working through a problem on the back of an envelope. The numbers are not supposed to be perfectly precise, but they do help me keep things in perspective, and appreciate the mammoth size of a multi-trillion dollar asset.

Areas where this simplified analysis break down occur on the short term. We can certainly have periods of illiquidity, where a near-term rush of demand overwhelms the sell-side of the order-books.

However, I would say most of us are looking not so much for Bitcoin to hit $150k, but to STAY THERE. This is where analysis like this comes fully into play, and it will certainly require sustained and sizeable capital flows to keep Bitcoin steady at higher altitudes.

Make no mistake, we’ve CRASHED to $100k several times already. This sends a very clear message that demand is serious, sizeable, and keeping us remarkably steady up here already.

I fully expect us to venture to higher plateaus, the question is, how long will they last, and will we have the capital inflows required to keep us there.

Things move slower up here, and I like to keep the law of large numbers in mind whenever the Bitcoin price doesn’t go up as quickly as the crowd expects.




Thanks for reading,

James

Looking for an Onchain Data API?

My friend The Bitcoin Researcher has just rolled out a new API for Bitcoin onchain data which has just about every metric you’d want. I’ve had a few folks reach out looking for API access, and I highly recommend checking this service out if you’re interested in playing with the underlying data feeds.


Masterclass #15: My Buy-The-Dip Checklist
Bitcoin price dips are inevitable, and folks who bought high invariably end up selling low. In this post, I walk through how Check the HODLer takes advantage of these opportunities to stack sats.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
FEB 07, 2025
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

It may not feel like it right now, but it has been 5-months since the Bitcoin price traded more than -20% below its all-time-high.

The deepest correction we have had since mid-Sept-2024 was in late-Jan-2025 where we managed to tag -17%…which lasted for a few hours, before a rally kicked in and set a new ATH of $109k a week later.

Sentiment on the timeline is about as bearish as I have seen it for a while, and if I was to wager the cause…it probably isn’t because people hold too much Bitcoin…

The altcoin apocalypse continues to wreak havoc on the average crypto-punter’s portfolio, and it seriously shows.

To my eye, this bull market has been incredibly stable and resilient, and the drawdown profile tells a better story than I could in a thousand words. If we index the price to the FTX low, we’re also in the same spot we were before breaking the ATH of the last two cycles.

Folks who are bearish, either got rekt in alts, or have far too greedy expectations (likely both, as these two are often related).




Live Chart
With this in mind, it has been quite a while since we have run through the toolkit, checklist, and framework Check the HODLer uses for stacking sats. This means we’re long overdue for a refresher, so today’s post will cover the following topics:

A big picture assessment of the bull cycle so far.
How fearful the average short-term holder is right now.
Whether we have any signs of a local capitulation.
My checklist and tools I use to personally stack sats when the time is right.
To paraphrase Warren Buffett, ‘I prefer to buy my corn when there’s blood in the streets. I’m not greedy, I just don’t own enough'.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

My dip checklist as it stands today is:

✅ Market looks very healthy at a macro scale, thus I believe the bull is in tact.
🟧 There is a decent chance we retest the STH cost basis around $92k.
🟧 STH-MVRV is close to 1, but not quite there yet. I wouldn’t kick myself for bidding here, but I’m also willing to be patient.
✅ STH-SOPR is below 1, my base case is investors are still in buy-the-dip mode.
✅ STH-RPLR is below 0, meaning top buyers are locking in more loss than profit.
✅ Funding rates have cooled off significantly.
✅ Long liquidations spiked on the recent sell-off, flushing out leverage.
🟧 Short liquidations haven’t kicked in yet, waiting for confirmation.
💭 Feedback Survey Reminder

Thank you to everyone who filled out our Paid Subscriber survey from our previous post! If you haven’t yet, we’d love to hear from you. It only takes a few minutes, and your input helps us improve our newsletter and product. Click below to share your thoughts:

Start Survey

Full Premium Video


Mr HODLer

This post is written from mainly the perspective of Check the HODLer, and we’re going to give Check the Analyst a break for today. What this means is that I am making the following assumptions:

I like the corn, and I want to buy it.
I prefer to buy my corn at a discount, when top buyers are selling in panic.
I am relatively price insensitive, with a long term accumulation time horizon.
This means I do not care about being liquidated on a leveraged position if the market goes below my buy price.
Most importantly, my core assumption here is that the Bitcoin bears are ultimately going to be proven wrong. I am going to ignore the possibility that we have topped and are some kind of nasty bear market (because Check the HODLer actually doesn’t care, that’s Mr Analyst’s problem if it happens next week).

Since I’m a structural Bitcoin bull, and I want to stack sats, how do I do it?

The first few chapters will help us visualise the underlying dynamics, and then we will close with the simplified checklist.

The Lay of the Land

First up, I like to take in the big picture, trying to make sure I am not buying into a market which is overheated, and exploding into a euphoric bull top…because that would just be dumb.

The Mayer Multiple Z-Score is very close to 0, which means the distance between price and the 200DMA ($78k) is close to the average.

In bull markets, we often retest, and trade below 0 on this metric. Price could theoretically get down to around $75k, and this metric would still be within very typical conditions for an uptrend.

The higher we bounce, the more bullish the market is (and that would signal an acceleration towards a more euphoric phase in my view). If we go lower, say to $80k, that would actually make me even MORE bullish, as it would flush out everyone who doesn’t want to see then end of this movie.




Live Chart
Looking at the distribution of this metric during bullish conditions, we’re almost dead centre. 45% of the time we are higher, and 55% we are lower. There is no gravity either way, and as far as bull markets go, we’re in the most average and expected place possible.

It should be no surprise that the market is consolidating where it is right now…it is literally the most normal conditions we could ask for (statistically speaking).




Live Chart
If we run a similar study for the MVRV Z-Score, we can see that we’re trading at a much higher elevation, and are cooling off from a peak value of +1.3σ.

Remember, MVRV measures the magnitude of paper gains held within the supply. High levels of unrealised profit is ultimately what creates the incentive for HODLers to take profit, which creates sell-side pressure.

The MVRV-Z metric is currently at 0.85, which I consider to be warm, but not overheated.

The market is cooling down and taking a breather after the run-up above $100k.




Live Chart
When the market peaked at the $109k ATH, MVRV Z-Score was up at +1.3σ. Only 15% of all days have traded at higher levels. My simple interpretation here is that $109k doesn’t appear to have been an uncontrolled euphoric blow off top, as they usually get in to right tail 10% or 5% range.

As a result, I am not too concerned about my buying the top at this stage, although I am very conscious that the market is obviously no longer trading in a deep value zone.

At the current level of +0.85σ, MVRV-Z is higher 30% of the time. In sports terminology, that means we’re approximately halfway into the second half of the game (and the orange team is winning by the way).




Live Chart
In summary, we’re obviously in the second half of a robust and resilient bull market. The drawdowns continue to be shallow, and we don’t seem to have had a euphoric blow off top yet. So far, so good in my book.

The Fear Incentive

The next step is taking a look at the existing holder base, and I am specifically looking for periods when top buyers start to get very fearful.

What creates fear?

Paper Losses.

If we start with some key pricing levels, I have three on my radar right now:

The Short-Term Holder Cost basis at $92k. This is the first major line of defence for the bulls, and the pivot point where recent buyers will start getting quite uncomfortable.
The 200DMA & 50% Fib Retracement at $80k. The 200DMA is a classic bull/bear support line, and it aligns with the -50% fib retracement of the latest upswing, providing technical confluence.
I believe this level is in play, and is the next major area of interest should the STH cost basis break. It is also inside the ‘air-pocket’ we’ve covered recently.
The True Market Mean at $64k. This is the in case of emergency, please break glass level. As I covered in Rethinking Bears, this is about as bad as I expect it to get should the bear come out of hibernation.
I don’t think we get down here anytime soon, but if we do, I will be selling the couch (I have to do this anyway, we’re moving house soon…).
For the purposes of the rest of this post, the only level I care about for now is the STH cost basis at $92k. I also suspect there are ~50% odds we will reach it before this chop is done.




Live Chart
As it stands, just over half of all STH supply is now held below its cost basis, which means a slight majority of recent buyers are underwater. The implication here is that we have a decent enough pool of folks who are likely to be sensitive to price movements.

In my top heaviness framework, this is a ‘caution’ sign, meaning further price declines are likely to illicit an increasingly fearful response.




Live Chart
However, just because a coin is ‘underwater’, doesn’t mean it is holding a nasty unrealised loss. In fact, out of all the value held by STHs, just 20% of it is in loss. This differs from the chart above (supply in loss) because it is showing us how bad it is (the USD delta between cost basis and spot price).

The damage just isn’t that bad right now, and it’s certainly not something that has me concerned at any macro scale.

If the market were to sell-off below $92k, I suspect this damage would increase meaningfully, creating a larger pool of panic sellers…and a sat stacking opportunity for a humble HODLer like myself. Levels around 40% is typical of a bull market correction, and we saw this get up to 90%+ back in the chopsolidation range.

Note: that last observation alludes to a stronger than usual holder base this cycle.




Live Chart
The summary here is that this correction is pretty weak sauce right now. As such, I am increasingly confident that the completely rekt sentiment we are seeing is primarily due to the altcoin apocalypse, and probably a few worthless MSTR call options.

The Reaction Function

I think Bitcoin is genuinely in a league of its own this cycle. BTC Holders appear to know what they own, why they own it, and the time-frame they own it for.

My reasoning for this thesis is captured in the next set of charts, which are all about the reaction function of investors who are realising profit or loss. Usually during a pullback, I want to see local top buyers capitulating during sell-offs and their fear is my opportunity.

The chart below shows how the Bitcoin supply distribution relative to price has changed between 16-Dec-2024 (the first ATH at $108k), and today.

There are two major insights here:

Sellers are still primarily swing traders or risk managers who bought within the chopsolidation range (between $55k and $73k). OGs from prior cycles are largely sitting tight, telling us they’re HODLing on.
There is heavier accumulation demand near the bottom of our trading range ($90k to $100k) compared to prices near the top of the range (above $100k). Once again, this feels more like sophisticated and patient dip buyers, with fewer folks FOMO buying the rips.
There is still a meaningful volume of top buyers with a cost basis of $100k+, but overall this picture looks reasonably healthy to me.




Live Chart
Those chopsolidation sellers are still locking in between $1.0B and $1.5B worth of profit per day. This is well off the highs, but it still pretty massive in scale. The counter point is this also means we have an equal and opposite amount of demand up here. However, all things being equal, this is still a decent size of sell-side pressure which must be absorbed every day (and so far, it has been).

On the latest sell-off, we saw a spike of around $325M in realised losses, which looks like a fairly decent volume when priced in USD.

Perhaps this is the local capitulation we were looking for?




Live Chart
Not quite.

When we adjust for market size (by pricing in BTC), you have to squint to see it.

Either we need more pain, of Bitcoin holders right now are very serious, and just are not phased by the drawdown so far.




Live Chart
We have now completed all the pre-work of a comprehensive market assessment. My overall summary is as follows:

Big picture. the market looks healthy and stable. We’re in a bull, likely in the second half of it, but we’re not currently inside a crazy euphoric top.
This correction so far is minor by most measures, both in drawdown depth, and in the damage it has caused amongst STHs.
We could pull back to $75k to $80k and everything would still be very normal by bull market standards (although I would have no longer have a couch to sit on).
Sell-side from profit taking is still elevated, but the market is absorbing it. I am amazed we’re still up here at $97k folks, the demand for corn is no joke.
Even the STHs who are underwater, do not seem to be panicking at this stage. This reads like we either need a bigger pullback to scare them…or BTC holders this cycle are very serious about that whole ‘I’m not selling’ thing.
Check’s Dip Checklist

Ok, we’ve reached the main course.

The purpose of the analysis above was to help readers visualise the market mechanics which I believe drive Bitcoin markets in the near term. What is so useful about the upcoming checklist is that it encapsulates all of the key insights above, but in a small handful of tools.

Check’s Buy-The-Dip checklist is as follows:

I want Short-Term Holders to be stressed (STH-MVRV < 1.0).
I want local top buyers to capitulate (STH-SOPR < 1.0).
I want more realised losses than profits being locked in (STH-RPLR < 1.0).
Futures funding rates must be cooled off, or negative.
Long liquidations should peak, but then followed by a short squeeze.
For STH-MVRV to hit 1.0, price would have to dip to $92k. I want this to happen, and I think there is a 50% chance it does.

I expect it to act as support, although I must highlight that this cycle we have deviated below it several times.

Hitting the STH cost basis is normal, expected, healthy, and should be welcomed by all. It is also however the pivot point where panic and fear is more likely to set in.

Quick Tip: The start of a bear market is often indistinguishable from the bottom of a bull market dip. Price dips look scary as hell when it is happening, which is why Check the HODLer makes his decision for what he will do BEFORE we get there.

If it goes lower, so be it, I will make a plan for that event also.




Live Chart
STH-SOPR is also trading below 1.0, which means the average STH coin is now locking in losses. As a general rule:

Bull markets see SOPR primarily above 1.0, with short-sharp dips below 1.0, as local top buyers capitulate, and smart money buy the dip.
Bear markets see SOPR primarily below 1.0, with short-sharp rips above 1.0, as folks take whatever exit liquidity they can to get the hell out of here.
Until proven otherwise, my base case is that the green box in the chart below will get longer.




Live Chart
If we take a ratio between STH profit and loss, we get the metric shown below. It is similar to STH-SOPR, except it captures the size and volume as well (rather than an average profit/loss multiple).

Same story, we have a nice dip below 0 in this case, which means STH losses are marginally larger than profit right now.




Live Chart
The last thing I want is to stack sats when the leveraged apes on futures exchanges are paying a huge interest rate to be long.

Funding rates are cooling off meaningfully. This is not what a frothy and highly leveraged market looks like in my book.




Live Chart
The sell-off this week also blew up a huge number of leveraged trading accounts, and the majority of them were (obviously) on the long-side. This tells me we flushed out a lot of leverage, but we may still have folks trying to catch falling knives.

Heavy long liquidations is a good sign that the market has wiped out excess leverage. However, my preference is that we follow this up with these folks getting cocky, and switching to the short side.

‘Bitcoin is finally going back to $20k, my favourite trader is max short, so I’m going to win it all back with this trade!’

Squeezing the shorts will put this metric into the red, and that is a nice confluence that we wiped them out on both sides of the trade.

Thanks for playing.




Live Chart
Concluding Thoughts

Keeping it simple is more often than not the best strategy. If I could only take two Bitcoin metrics with me, it would be STH-MVRV and STH-SOPR. They are the bread and butter of my dip buying strategy, and they are a HODLers best friend.

My dip checklist as it stands today is:

✅ Market looks very healthy at a macro scale, thus I believe the bull is in tact.
🟧 There is a decent chance we retest the STH cost basis around $92k.
🟧 STH-MVRV is close to 1, but not quite there yet. I wouldn’t kick myself for bidding here, but I’m also willing to be patient.
✅ STH-SOPR is below 1, my base case is investors are still in buy-the-dip mode.
✅ STH-RPLR is below 0, meaning top buyers are locking in more loss than profit.
✅ Funding rates have cooled off significantly.
✅ Long liquidations spiked on the recent sell-off, flushing out leverage.
🟧 Short liquidations haven’t kicked in yet, waiting for confirmation.
There is a case to be made that this is THE dip.

There is also a case to be made that there will be many more dips within this corrective phase.

Nobody knows where the bottom is, just like nobody knows where the top is.

As we saw in the 2024 chopsolidation, each dip bottomed at a progressively lower price ($56k, $54k, and $49k). As it turned out, all of those prices are now much lower than where Bitcoin is today at $97k, and sats stacked at those levels never really went that far underwater throughout that choppy process.

For Check the HODLer, his goal is to buy coins at the best price he can, and weather the smallest drawdowns along the way.

If our destiny is to return to $75k, so be it.

My plan is to stack sats during the most scary and fearful events until we get there, and I always make sure my decision is made well before I need to make it.

Have a great weekend folks, and as always, let me know if you have any questions.

Thanks for reading,

James



Masterclass #16: Understanding Long & Short-Term Holders
The Long and Short-Term Holder cohorts are some of the most powerful tools we have in onchain analysis, and this masterclass breaks down how I think about them in my Bitcoin analysis.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
MAR 28, 2025
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

With the market bumbling along and going nowhere, today feels like a great time for the next instalment of the onchain masterclass.

One of the most powerful facets of onchain analysis is our ability to segment the Bitcoin supply into cohorts which display similar behaviour over time.

By far the most popular, and arguably useful cohorts are the Long and Short-Term Holders, which provide an incredible level of insight into investor sentiment. We can use these cohorts to do the following:

Identify cyclical tops and bottoms.
Gauge investor sentiment and trend shifts.
Analyse both macro and micro market dynamics.
Assess what the smart money HODLers are doing vs the fast money speculators.
Ultimately, these two cohorts allow us to simplify complex market dynamics into two investor behaviour buckets. We can then use metrics which describe how profitable each group is to establish confidence in our read of the market.

Today is also the perfect time to run this analysis, as the 155-day threshold separating Long and Short-Term Holders is right before the break-out to new ATHs in October last year.

Short-Term Holders are the ones who bought after the break-out, and Long-Term Holders represent everyone else.

Time to study both sides of this coin.




Live Chart
📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

The Long/Short-Term Holder cohort is one of the most powerful tools we have in the world of onchain data. It offers just the right balance of simplicity, and effectiveness for thinking about the behaviour of Bitcoin investors.
Long-Term Holders are usually synonymous with the experienced, high conviction Bitcoiners, who accumulate and HODL in bears, and take profits during bulls.
The Short-Term Holders are the flip-side, being the fast money speculators, traders, and even the HODLers to be.
We can identify regime shifts when Unrealised and Realised profit/loss metrics for both cohorts change rapidly. This accompanies nasty sell-off events which plunge investors into paper losses, but also euphoric profit taking near tops.
For the short-term holders especially, their MVRV and SOPR variants are all-weather Swiss army knife metrics, providing us with a remarkable level of insight, from just two oscillators.
Full Premium Video


Why The 155-day Threshold?

The world is a complex place, and analysing complex systems requires a set of assumptions, and simplifications. If we opt for a data-driven perspective, we also need to separate what we ‘feel’ from what we observe.

One of the biggest areas of ‘complaint’ I see on Twitter are people who proclaim that ‘155-days cannot be a Long-Term Holder, that’s a dumb-ass trader! Only people who have held for 2 cycles are Long-Term Holders!’.

These folks are taking an arbitrary ‘gut feel’ for what they think a LTH is.

Glassnode originally developed the LTH / STH cohort back in 2020, and re-affirmed their results in a more recent piece titled Time is Money. Their analysis found that there is a very distinct shift in the probability that a coin is spent on any day based on how long it has remained dormant.

Several independent analysts like ResearchBitcoin and BullFromTheSea have replicated this study using their own Bitcoin node, and came to almost identical results.

The Glassnode charts below show the probability of a coin being spent in a 7 to 120-day window. Notice how all of them reach a stable equilibrium (flat trend) in the red box, which starts at 155-days.




UTXO spending probabilities | by Glassnode
If we separate our feelings from the data-driven facts, the term ‘Long-Term Holder’ can be seen as simply a label which describes coins that all have a similar UNLIKELY chance of moving each day.

The ‘Short-Term Hodler’ cohort is the inverse, representing coins which we should expect are LIKELY to move, but the longer they are held, the less likely that becomes.

There are of course additional sub-cohorts within these groups, but I believe the simple LTH / STH framework is more than good enough to achieve 95% of the signal.

We can go deeper…but the juice isn’t worth the squeeze most of the time.

Framing It Up

Before we jump into the charts, I want to quickly refresh everyone on where these metrics sit in the Checkonchain Framework.

The power of onchain analysis comes from our ability to analyse the Bitcoin supply across three core axes:

Axis 1 (X): Are the coins moving, or not (Spent vs Unspent).
Axis 2 (Y): Are the coins in profit, or loss (and by how much).
Axis 3 (Z): Who holds those coins? (cohorts).
The charts that follow all have a component of all three axes, which in my experience makes them the most powerful tools we have for analysing Bitcoin.




Live Chart
The Long-Term Holder

Let’s start with the Long-Term Holder cohort, as I would wager that the vast majority of readers are probably 99% aligned with this group.

The typical behaviour pattern and profile of LTHs is:

They accumulate and HODL in bears.
They hold onto their coins through nasty drawdowns and volatility.
They understand what Bitcoin is, and why they own it.
They have experienced a cycle or two, and have a strong Bitcoiner instinct.
They lighten up and sell into bull market strength to take profits.
We can see this behaviour clearly in their aggregate supply, which increases during the bad time, and declines in distinct ‘U-shapes’ in the bull.

Note also the red arrows, which represents the LTHs who buy on the way up, and HODL well into the bear. I call these folks ‘first-cycle LTHs’ and we will revisit them shortly.




Live Chart
Selling High

A key characteristic of the LTH cohort is they are the primary seller during bull markets. The chart below shows coinday destruction by LTHs, which is best thought of as the ‘volume of holding time’ being spent.

When the oldest coins start coming back to market, it means those smart money, high conviction holders are exiting their position all at the same time.




Live Chart
We can see a nearly identical pattern in realised profit locked in by the LTH cohort. They sell both the oldest coins, and the ones holding the largest paper gains near cycle tops.

Like clockwork, their distribution pressure starts to ramp up whenever the market approaches the previous major high, and they sell all the way up into the apex of the price advance.

Long-Term Holders selling brings long dormant supply back into liquid circulation. They are the counter force acting against the inflow of new demand.

I heard a good saying recently, which I will paraphrase to explain why LTHs are often considered to be the smart money:

The only difference between smart and the dumb money in markets…is the smart money know when and how to sell.




Live Chart
HODLing Through Bear Markets

If you have lived through a Bitcoin bear market, you will no doubt find these next charts all too familiar. There are two broad categories of Long-Term Holders during bear markets:

Those who have been around for a while and are truly price insensitive. They accumulate slowly, and do not care if price trades below their cost basis. They can weather tremendous drawdowns because they have iron cast conviction.
Those who bought the top, and are about to find out.
The chart below shows the Unrealised Loss carried by LTHs in both categories. Bear market floors have historically been established when more than half of the Bitcoin market cap is held by underwater LTH investors.

This is the kind of financial pain that only the most hardcore HODLers can handle, everyone else has capitulated, meaning there are no sellers left.

Complete seller exhaustion.




Live Chart
The harsh reality is, most HODLers do not survive their first bear market. A lot of the folks who buy during the final stages of the bull market, HODL their coins until the very end…only to sell it all on the final sell-off.

Those ‘first-cycle-HODLers’ join the speculators in selling absolutely everything at the largest possible loss, all at the same time.

For the true smart money investors, whenever you see LTH realised losses spike like this, it generally means the final bottom is now being hammered out.




Live Chart
LTH-MVRV and LTH-SOPR

The LTH cohort is the only one where their MVRV and SOPR look very similar.

As a quick refresher:

MVRV represents the UNREALISED profit/loss multiple. Think of this as a ‘paper gains’ oscillator, describing the incentive for investors to take profit (high values), or capitulate losses (low values).
SOPR represents the REALISED profit/loss multiple. It shows us the average gain or loss being locked in by this cohort.
For Long-Term Holders, their MVRV and SOPR pair tend to be very slow, macro, and cyclical. Notice how they often reach 5x to 10x gains because of how low their average cost basis is.

I personally do not consult these two metrics very often, namely because they are metrics you only need to check a handful of times each cycle.




Live Chart
The Transfer of Wealth

What is a bull market?

It is a period where an assets price rises consistently, offering existing holders an opportunity to gradually transfer their holdings to new buyers, at higher prices.

What is a bear market?

“In bear markets, stocks return to their rightful owners.” — J.P Morgan

We can see these dynamics clearly in the age breakdown of the Realised Cap, where the vast majority of the wealth stored in Bitcoin is held by Long-Term Holders at the bottom of a bear cycle. Price insensitive buyers slowly accumulate as speculators and weak hands capitulate out.

It takes time, but eventually there is just nobody left to sell.

Interestingly, notice that LTHs still hold around 40% of the wealth today. This is very different to previous cycles where this metric declines below 10%.

I sense this could be another signal that a larger pool of investors know what they own, and their Bitcoin thesis is increasingly coming to pass.




Live Chart
On the flip side, the riskiest time in a bull market is the top.

Tops are formed when the maximum proportion of the holder base are googling ‘how to buy Bitcoin’. The least sophisticated, lowest conviction, and most price sensitive Short-Term Holders saturate the market…meaning there is nobody else left to buy.

This transfer of wealth is a process, and whilst there are no hard and fast rules for where these metrics need to reach, it does help us visualise how deep we are into the bull or bear cycle.




Live Chart
The Short-Term Holder

The hot money, the fast money, the speculator, and the Long-Term Holder to be. The Short-Term Holder cohort captures all coins aged 5-months or less, and is a highly dynamic and responsive cohort.

Short-Term Holder metrics are also the absolute GOAT, I use them every single day I sit down to analyse the Bitcoin market.

As we covered above, the supply of coins which are ‘mobile and active’ swells during bull markets. This reflects both a divestment by the smart money, but also the influx of new money. What makes the STH cohort so interesting is it is a real mix of different people with different incentives.

Every coin a HODLer stacks starts life off as a STH.
Every trader bouncing coins between exchanges is a STH.
Every noob Bitcoiner buying their first coin is a STH.
Every exchange hot wallet is a STH.
Most importantly, the STH cohort is the one that represents marginal buyers, and the ‘kinetic energy’ in the Bitcoin market.

Whenever STH supply declines, it means less trading activity, less demand, less energy, and most likely..less numba go up.

As an important note, they are also the ONLY ones who buy the top, and especially when the market is in price discovery, the only ones who can lock in a realised loss.

This makes their data-sets SUPER powerful because we can spot inflection points very early, and adjust our thinking in response.




Live Chart
The Shot Across The Bow

My Top Heaviness framework for spotting bull market tops is primarily based in Short-Term Holder metrics and behaviour.

The chart below shows the unrealised profit held by STHs.

In bull markets the paper gains held by new buyers gets bigger…and bigger…AND BIGGER…until it absolutely implodes.
The shot across the bow sell-off is the one that shatters bullish confidence, as every top buyer gets smoked, and their portfolio goes from very green…to very red.



Live Chart
The reason we call it the shot across the bow is because it is a near miss. It calls back to the days where naval ships would fire a warning shot (or cannonball) right over the bow of the ship. The intention isn’t to hit the enemy, but it sends a signal that we mean business.

The smart money can ‘feel’ this sell-off is different. It’s angrier, worse than the corrections on the way up, and it’s now time to look for exit liquidity.

Short-Term Holder UNREALISED paper losses explode higher, which shatters confidence, and usually means the mighty bull has finally been slain.

As it stands today, we have not seen such an event this cycle. It still has more similarities to a bull correction so far, but this is a key metric to keep watch over.




Live Chart
As an analyst, I always look at both UNREALISED and REALISED profit/loss metrics as a pair.

Unrealised Profit/Loss reflect the incentive to either cash in, or capitulate.
Realised Profit/Loss provide confirmation that investors are acting on that incentive, and crystallising their gains or losses.
The shot across the bow sell-offs stand out like a sore thumb, and are often of an equivalent magnitude to the final capitulation at the bottom of a bear.

Just like STH unrealised losses, this bull cycle has not seen a blow out loss event just yet, which is more evidence that the bulls may have some fight still in them. I’m not seeing severe and widespread panic and fear just yet.




Live Chart
The Swiss Army Knives

This brings us to the final two charts, and the two I use more than any other. These are my Bitcoin analysis Swiss army knives, and they are all-weather tools packed full of information.

STH-MVRV represents the unrealised profit multiple held by STHs, and is an invaluable tool for tracking trends, local peaks, dips to buy, and capitulation events.
STH-SOPR represents the realised profit multiple locked in by the average STH spent coin. They take the biggest profit near local tops, and the biggest loss near local lows.
In the STH-MVRV chart below, I highlight points (black circles) where price convincingly breaks below the STH cost basis, which is a key threshold. My base assumption is whenever price is below this price level, I adopt a more cautious view.

Whenever price breaks below STH cost basis, Check the Analyst becomes more conservative, and Check the HODLer moves into patient and strategic sat stacking mode.

We also have prepared masterclass modules specifically for MVRV and SOPR which will help frame up why these metrics trade the way they do, and how I apply them.




Live Chart
STH-SOPR is much more volatile, but also much more responsive. The bull/bear trends I highlighted in the MVRV chart above (green/red boxes) have been shifted slightly to the left in the SOPR chart below.

This is because SOPR will indicate a potential trend change much faster, as local top buyers start taking losses before the cost basis is broken. Similarly, at local lows, profit returns to the system before the momentum traders even know what is going on.

I have folks often ask me what Bitcoin metrics they should study first, or implement into their first automated model. My answer is always the same:

STH-MVRV.
STH-SOPR.
Funding Rates (which is effectively futures SOPR).
Nail these three, and your analysis will be leaps and bounds ahead of the crowd.




Live Chart
Concluding Thoughts

The Long/Short-Term Holder cohort is such an elegant, reliable, and simple model to account for many of the complexities in Bitcoin data. It provides just the right amount of precision, whilst also being a very intuitive framework for thinking about the problem.

Onchain critics can’t let go of their bias that 155-days ‘isn’t long enough’, but the data says otherwise. If we called them red coins and blue coins, maybe they would think about it more seriously, but at the end of the day, this is what makes onchain analysis our edge.

Check the HODLer tries to emulate the Long-Term Holder cohort, stacking sats when it is cheap, and avoiding buying when the smart money are cashing out heavily. He tracks the Short-Term Holders closely, because they are the folks he wants to buy coins from, especially when they are capitulating at a discount to their original acquisition price.

Check the Analyst loves both of these cohorts, because they make the Bitcoin market so much easier to read. A bit like having partial X-ray vision, we can watch what the rest of the crowd is doing, and use that insight to our advantage.

Thanks for reading,

James





Masterclass #17: Exchanges Are Running Out of Coins!
The exchanges are always just one day away from running out of Bitcoin, and the supply squeeze that follows with be epic...right? Today we tackle the narrative...which just won't go away.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
APR 28, 2025
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

Every single cycle, without fail, the narrative of Bitcoin exchanges running out of coins and leading to god-mode supply squeeze comes back from the grave.

Making hyperbolic claims about exchange balances, whales, and large entities is a crowd favourite, because it ‘feels’ extremely bullish, and plays into the hand of Bitcoin’s absolute scarcity. This makes it an extremely attractive story for commentators and influencers to tap into, hunting a dopamine rush from that next thousand likes.

In today’s piece, I am going to address why the narrative about exchanges running out of corn is nonsense, and how I think about these datasets.




As an adjacent topic, I also want to explain why the launch of the ETFs has not created any material shift in the way onchain metrics work. This is one of the most commonly asked questions I have, and I have now built the charts to illustrate why.

This is a piece which has been a very long time in the making, and will no doubt be a reference point for subscribers for many years to come.

Time to clean up our thinking, and up-skill in filtering out signal from the noise.

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

It is my view that even if exchange balances are declining, the majority of the commentary around them is mistaken. Exchanges are not going to run out of coins, and this also isn’t the metric I would consult for the infamous ‘supply squeeze’. Exchange balances have not deviated from historical norms to my eye.
The decline in exchange balances is a result of some portion of real demand, but also internal wallets being shuffled around between exchange and ETF clusters.
ETFs are not a new phenomena, and they mechanically function almost the same way that centralised exchanges do in terms of their onchain footprint.
When we look at onchain data sourced from various data providers, what we find is that filtering out intra-day spends of the same coin, nullifies around 80%-95% of the noise created by exchange internal management.
Given we are surveying the sentiment of a population, and then extrapolating our findings to the wider market, any of these filtering techniques provides more than enough clarity for HODLers to make a confident calls about market conditions.
We do not need data to be perfectly accurate and precise for it to be extremely useful. Folks can spend inordinate volumes of time and money trying to correct for something that doesn’t meaningfully change the end result of our interpretation.
Full Premium Video


Before we get started, I wanted to remind everyone of a video we created back in May last year for one of our earliest Q&A sessions. The video covers whales and large entities, and will be very useful background knowledge for those who really want to wrap their heads around this stuff.

The Challenge With Exchange Balances

As we know, Bitcoin is a transparent ledger, which updates the UTXO set every block, as new transactions and balance changes occur. Whilst the blockchain data may be transparent, it is no easy feat assigning each UTXO to a specific entity, which means we must rely on some data provider doing it for us.

Having worked at Glassnode (an onchain data provider) previously, I have seen first hand that maintaining robust and up-to-date labels is no easy feat (and their team is world-class). It requires constant maintenance by experienced data scientists, and the building of advanced clustering algorithms.

Glassnode is one of the best in the business, and even then, the job is never finished, constantly changing, and full of curveballs.

Exchanges update their wallet management procedures all the time, which breaks previously built heuristics.
There is an endless list of new exchanges and entities coming and going, meaning work has to be prioritised via the Pareto distribution principle to track the big ones first (80:20 Rule).
Things are complicated when an exchange like Coinbase also has a custody arm, which means their balance includes both corporate treasuries, ETFs, and retail clients.
New wallets are found all the time, and if we discovered a new Binance cold wallet today, the historical data has to be updated because it might have existed for many years. This means data is constantly updated, and is not stationary over time.
Every data provider then has their own heuristics, labels, and algorithms and it becomes impossible to directly compare and contrast them. We’d have to directly compare each individual entity, make sure we’re not double counting exchanges vs custody, and use proprietary systems.
If I summarise all of the above, the key issue is it is very hard to draw a confident conclusion from data which is in a persistent state of flux, and there is little chance of reaching wider consensus amongst data providers.

Now, every man and his dog is talking about exchange balances falling off a cliff on twitter this week, citing their favourite chart. I can’t and won’t speak to the validity of any one data provider, but I will say that I have confidence in Glassnode’s work (since I understand how it is constructed), and also respect the work of SaniExp of TimeChainIndex who I often use as a sense check.

If we look at Glassnode’s breakdown of exchange balances (with my addition of the Fidelity and VanEck ETFs which are not held at Coinbase), aggregate balances appear to be range-bound since 2018.

I personally consider exchanges and ETFs as equivalent, since both are just wrappers of BTC held by a centralised custodian.

In other words, Bitcoin has traded from $3k to $64k in 2019-21, back to $15k in 2022, saw the ETFs launch, and then traded to $110k…and all the while exchange balances are more or less oscillating sideways.

On net, no change since 2018, which is when balances first started to stabilise at these levels.




There is also no clear relationship between price, and changes in exchange balances. The chart below shows 90-days of both inflows or outflows associated with both price pumps, and price dumps.

We can have massive inflows in a bull market, but can just as equally see massive outflows at the bottom of a bear.

There is no discernible relationship between aggregate exchange flows and the Bitcoin price in my experience.

I know several sophisticated algorithmic traders who have found success monitoring the flows in/out of specific exchanges. But if you’re just a HODLer, and are not running any advanced automated strategies like this, I wouldn’t worry too much about exchange metrics. I do not personally use them as part of my analysis process.




As I poked around with the above exchange data, I noticed that Coinbase and Kraken are the primary exchanges seeing any serious and sustained outflows this year.

The chart below removes those two, and we can now see that the aggregate balance of the remaining exchanges is dead flat since 2018.




So now let’s isolate Coinbase and Kraken, and we can now see the dramatic decline which has been in effect since 2022. It also seems to be accelerating after the ETFs went live in 2024.

This should set off bells, since both of these exchanges are onshore in the US (and thus a primary source for ETF acquisition), and Coinbase is the custodian for 10-of-12 of the ETF products including IBIT and GBTC.

VanEck (HODL) uses Gemini for custody, and only Fidelity (FBTC) has their own in-house custody solution, the rest are at Coinbase.

For Coinbase specifically, Glassnode combines their exchange and custody arms as a single entity holding ~675k BTC. To the best of my understanding, most other data providers have limited to no visibility of the Coinbase custody arm, so their data appears to miss this important factor.




So now let’s run a quick sense check against TimeChainIndex…

Ok…so according to this reference point, the Coinbase entity holds 2.696M BTC, with 1.1M associated with the exchange, 1.0M with ETFs, and 597k in custody…

What should we believe?

In my opinion, the fact that we cannot answer that question confidently, is why I make the strong recommendation the HODLers can safely ignore exchange balance metrics.

When you can’t distinguish which way is up from down, there is likely to be more noise than signal.




Coinbase Assets Held | TimeChainIndex
In my opinion, we are probably seeing some decline in exchange balances today, however nothing out of the historical norms. Exchange balances are effectively unchanged since 2018, which was when they reached the plateau they have been at ever since.

What we are more likely seeing is coins shuffling into ETFs, and around various custody solutions. Without doubt, there is institutional demand at play, and we covered this back in Dipping a Toe but inspecting the SEC 13F filings.

What I do not believe is happening is some kind of god-candle supply squeeze loading. Price is set on the margin, and whenever the price goes up, you can bet your last sat that some dude will send his coins to Binance to sell into it.

The decline in exchange balances everyone is talking about, is primarily a result of internal wallets being shuffled around between exchange and ETF clusters. Not all of it, but enough to counter all of the engagement farming noise.

Why Onchain Data Still Works Post ETFs

This is the MOST common question I have received in recent months (even more than ‘wen top'). As you can imagine, I have spent considerable time pondering it as a result, and it is time to put pen to paper.

Since the ETFs have gone live, onchain metrics must have surely lost some part of their effectiveness, right?

What are the ETFs?

A vehicle where a significant volume of coins flow into onchain custody, and then largely remain dormant in an aggregate balance.
An offchain order-book where ownership shares for those coins trade around between investors.
Only when there is an imbalance in buy-side or sell-side are net flows transacted onchain back to an exchange by Authorised Participants.
Where have we seen these dynamics before? Centralised Exchanges.

At a mechanical level, Coinbase and Binance operate more or less identically to the ETFs, where price is set offchain, the majority of people opt for exchange custody out of convenience, and HODLers and traders create net-flows to buy, sell, and arbitrage.

The ETFs have not changed the calculus around onchain data in my view, and the better question to ask is; do Exchanges impact the accuracy of onchain data?

Ok, So Why Don’t Exchanges Break Onchain Data?

Great question!

Let’s start by discussing what I believe makes onchain data so powerful:

Onchain data provides us with a sentiment and behaviour read for 100% of the coins in the supply, and every day, some of them transact, and most do not.
Onchain data is just ONE of many data sources, and as the Bitcoin economy evolves, we must factor in other sectors like spot trading, derivatives, and ETFs.
When we want to conduct a survey of a population, we do not need to survey every single person. We only need to survey a statistically significant sample size, and then extrapolate it to the wider population.
In onchain analysis, we are surveying 100% of the Bitcoin supply, and then asking whether that sentiment read aligns with the rest of our datasets.

This is why SOPR looks like Funding Rates, and why Sell-side Risk looks like options implied volatility. We’re surveying HODLers and traders from two separate parts of the Bitcoin economy, and when they speak the same language, we can have higher confidence in our conclusions.

Recall the analysis framework from Masterclass #2, where I break down onchain analysis tools into three axes. Of particular interest for this discussion is the X axis in orange, splitting the supply into two buckets:

Unspent Metrics: describing coins which are not moving. Exchange and ETF cold wallets will live in this category for the most part, and will impact things like HODL Waves, LTH/STH Supply, and MVRV.
Spent Metrics: describing the coins which are on the move each day. Exchange flows, ETF net flows, Realised Profit/Loss, and SOPR all live on this axis.



Onchain Analysis Framework
How Exchanges Affect Unspent Metrics

The main area most people think exchanges should break onchain data is in unspent metrics like Long-Term Holder Supply.

Is it really Long-Term Holder Supply if it’s just a Binance cold wallet?

The chart below shows three traces:

LTH Supply by ResearchBitcoin.net which I use for Checkonchain (blue line)
LTH Supply using Glassnode’s Entity-Adjustment algorithms (blue area)
Exchange Balances by Glassnode (purple area)
Note that Glassnode specifically removes exchange balances from their LTH supply, whilst ResearchBitcoin does not. See how the blue line (RB) is higher than the blue area (GN)? It is also approximately in the middle of the purple zone.

For the purposes of practical analysis, the shape and behaviour of the two LTH supply curves in blue are effectively the same. I can comfortably draw a similar conclusion from either trace, and thus I rarely get bogged down in the nitty gritty details.

The reason ResearchBitcoin’s data is in the middle of the purple Exchange balance trace indicates that around half of exchange supply is classified as LTH (cold wallets), and the remaining half is classed as STH (hot wallets).




Here is the opposite set of traces comparing Short-Term Holder Supply, and we can come to the same conclusion.

For the average HODLer or analyst, we can analyse the market looking at unfiltered LTH and STH supply without losing too much resolution.




Let’s look at the Realised Cap, because we’d intuitively think that exchange internal wallet management would cause huge distortions in this metric…

You have to squint to see the difference between the Realised Cap computed by CoinMetrics, Glassnode, and ResearchBitcoin, all using different filtering techniques of various complexity.

Over the lifetime of this metric, the unfiltered Realised Cap has almost never deviated from the most advanced filtered one by more than ±5%.

As a dude who used to design 50m deep underground train stations using 3x 50mm diameter boreholes as input information…5% tolerance is a gift.




For practical purposes, the MVRV ratios shown below are also identical, and there is limited signal gained or lost by using any form of filtering or adjustment using labels and entities.

My ultimate view is that the Unspent metrics we use day-to-day are largely unaffected by exchanges and self-spends.

The core takeaway is that whilst there are error bars around individual entities, when we consider them in aggregate, it collapses down to a <5% difference, which is a rounding error in my book.

Folks can tie themselves into a pretzel trying to explain otherwise, but in the meantime, Checkonchain readers can move onto more important things.




Where Filtering Really Matters: Spent Metrics

Whilst filtering and adjusting unspent metrics has limited benefit in practice, we have to be much more careful with spent metrics. The reason for this is actually very simple;

The vast majority of coins which move each day, are actually spent many times. When you deposit a coin to Binance, they re-spend it several times as it moves through their hot/cold wallet systems, or leaves via a customer withdrawal.

Since so many coins are spent multiple times each day, it can result in heavily ‘inflated’ metrics which are non-economical in nature. This is one of the core value propositions of data-providers cleaning up their onchain data using filtering.

In the charts below, I will talk through data from three providers, and explore the impacts of each approach on the final outcome:

Glassnode (paid data) uses extremely advanced entity-adjustment algorithms, which hunts down any transactions and coins which match their ‘Binance’ or ‘Coinbase’ profile. This system requires a team of data scientists to maintain and is one of, if not the most advanced in the industry.
CoinMetrics (via free community data) who use comparatively simple, industry standard heuristics to filter out these self-spends, and adjust for obvious change. I know the firm also has more advanced paid clustering systems as well.
ResearchBitcoin who has a rather ingenious approach of simply comparing snapshots of the UTXO set on a daily basis. The system looks at what existed on Tuesday, and no longer exists on Wednesday at 00:00 UTC. Any UTXOs which have disappeared are considered spent, and any new ones are considered newly created and HODLed. Most importantly, this system never sees any of the intra-day noise, which filters out the same coin being spent multiple times.
Let’s size up how these three look as a measure of Transaction Volume.

All three are very similar in shape and magnitude. They are considerably smaller than the yellow zone that captures every single spent coin, including multiple spends intra-day.

Obviously the yellow zone is mostly noise, and we can safely discard it.




Zooming in, and getting rid of that ultra-noisy raw data, we can see that the behaviour of the three data feeds are remarkably similar, and we could draw similar insight from either one.

For Check the Analyst, the level of accuracy provided by either of these data-sources is more than sufficient for me to establish a sound case for where transaction volume is trending.




Let’s now bring in exchange inflow and outflow volumes by Glassnode.

What we can see, is that between 30% and 60% of all onchain volume is associated with coins flowing in or out of exchanges.

That’s a pretty big sample size, and each transaction carries a signature of how much profit or loss was being locked in, and how long the coin was held.




Realised Profit from either provider has a similar shape and magnitude, certainly enough for me to take a view on market behaviour.

Realised profit increases and peaks in bull markets, and subsequently decreases in bear markets as sentiment turns sour in both cases.




In terms of how different these traces are, Glassnode entity-adjustment is certainly a superior dataset, filtering out around 20% to 40% of the self-spends. It also allows for analysis of coins explicitly travelling in and out of exchanges, which is very useful for traders, hedge funds, and analysts looking for bespoke edge.

You can see that this 20%-40% delta for Spent metrics is much larger than the ~5% for Unspent metrics. Filtering matters a lot more here.

For folks who are really in the weeds with algorithmic or automated trading, this is where advanced systems like Glassnodes have an edge.

For HODLers like myself, I am more than happy to operate and make decisions on a daily basis, and can mentally account for many of these dynamics in my studies.




Realised losses tell the same story, so I won’t belabour the point.

We can get ‘close enough’ to the truth using any of these filtering techniques to filter out the influence of exchanges on onchain metrics.




One last nuance on Realised Profit/Loss metrics is that they are largely self-correcting. When someone sends a long HODLed coin to an exchange to sell it, they will lock in the large cost basis change since they acquired it.

Let’s say they acquired at $10k and sold at $100k. In this case, their deposit would lock in a $90k realised profit. If Binance then consolidates that coin into a hot wallet, the price is probably very close to the original deposit price of $100k, so the change is small by comparison. This is why the Realised Cap is so similar irrespective of the filtering technique applied.

Aggregate profit/loss metrics like SOPR are also nearly identical as a result, with an overall adjustment factor of around ±7.5% between data sources.

This is on par with unspent metrics like MVRV, and is unlikely to sway my conclusions by much, if at all.




Lastly to round out the piece, we can see that coinday destruction volumes only differ by around 5-20% over the long term. As a practitioner who is used to dealing with variability, uncertainty, and incomplete information, this is well and truly good enough to use in my style of analysis.




Concluding Thoughts

If you made it this far, well done.

I know this piece is quite technical and full of lots of jargon, but it kind of has to be, to be thorough and complete.

On the topic of exchange balances declining, it is my view that even if they are, the majority of the commentary around them is mistaken. Exchanges are not going to run out of coins, and this also isn’t the metric I would recommend people look at to plan for the infamous ‘supply squeeze’.

On the topic of how exchanges and ETFs impact onchain metrics, my summary is:

ETFs are not a new phenomena, and they mechanically function almost the same way that centralised exchanges do in terms of their onchain footprint.
When we look at onchain data sourced from various data providers, what we find is that filtering out intra-day spends of the same coin, nullifies around 80%-95% of the noise created by exchange internal management.
Given we are surveying the sentiment of a population, and then extrapolating our findings to the wider market, any of these filtering techniques provides more than enough clarity for HODLers to make a confident calls about market conditions.
We do not need data to be perfectly accurate and precise for it to be extremely useful. Folks can spend inordinate volumes of time and money trying to correct for something that doesn’t meaningfully change the end result of our interpretation.
You may also recognise that this is the principle reason why Checkonchain charts update only once per day. By doing a daily update using ResearchBitcoin’s data, we are ensuring that the data is largely clear from all the noise, and thus packed full of more signal!

Markets are all about working with incomplete information, and for someone who is fairly familiar with onchain data…TradFi markets are the ones that seem to have a serious problem with incomplete data.

They can only hope to ever have the transparency that Bitcoin has.

Thanks for reading,

James


How NOT to Buy Tops
Markets tend to favour those who can exercise contrarian thinking, by acting in the opposite direction of the herd. Today, we explore how I avoid buying Bitcoin at the WORST possible times.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
MAY 20, 2025
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

Markets are one of the most counter-intuitive things we deal with, and this is why so many people lose money when they attempt to trade them.

This is a result of our emotional hardware always seeking out information which supports our confirmation bias, and this process often happens sub-consciously.

Confirmation Bias: The tendency to seek, interpret, and recall information in a way that confirms our preexisting beliefs, while ignoring or discounting evidence which contradicts them.

Since we were children, we have been conditioned to avoid risk, with lessons passed down by our parents about how to avoid injury and mistakes…

I recall when I was a boy, I was fascinated when the sizzling hot plate came out at a Chinese restaurant, and my parents said ‘James, do not touch that, it is very hot’…We all have to touch the stove to learn those lessons for ourselves…

My confirmation bias kicked in, and I simply had to find out why the plate was sizzling like that…I also touched the cigarette lighter in the car, but I didn’t tell my parents about that one, it was too embarrassing to have made the same mistake twice…

In markets, we have two primary vectors of fear:

Fear of Loss, which leads to us being extremely tentative to buy an asset in a bear market, because we’re afraid it may keep going down. Our default behaviour is to wait until the market is ripping higher, because it always feels ‘safer’ when everyone else is doing the same thing.
Fear of Missing Out (FOMO), which is often even more painful than our aversion to taking a loss. The pain we experience when an asset we want to own is ripping to the upside makes us pile in when it feels good…usually preceding us buying the exact top of the market.
When you combine these two fears, you get herd behaviour, where the crowd waits until it feels good and safe to buy, often with leverage, which results in a massive wave of top buyers getting rekt.

In today’s post, I want to explore a simple set of tools I use to avoid buying tops. This includes local tops and global tops, because frankly, we never know which one it is until after we have touched the stove.

The idea is to identify a sizzling hot plate for what it is…a bloody hot sizzling iron plate.

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

One of the hardest things to master in markets, is control over our emotional response to both fear of loss, and fear of missing out. We can use market data to make better decisions by countering our emotions, with objective information.
Markets are mean reverting, meaning if we select a suitable anchor which the price oscillates around, we can identify extremes when investors are the most likely to sell increasingly large volumes. In this piece, I use Z-Score versions of the Mayer Multiple, MVRV and STH-MVRV.
We can use histograms and simple statistics to assess when these mean reverting oscillators are very high, such as times when fewer than 10% of trading days have closed higher.
These are periods where it is quite unlikely that Bitcoin keeps running, and is more likely to hit a local or global peak.
When we compare this to metrics like Realised Profit, or SOPR, we can find confluence where the average investor is both holding large paper gains, and starting to apply sell-pressure in larger volumes.
Times like this usually correspond to periods where speculators are piling on leverage in futures markets, creating a perfect storm for a meaningful market peak to be reached.
Check the HODLer uses this information to slow, or even stop his accumulation, preferring to allow the market to blow off steam, and re-find its next equilibrium level before stepping back in to buy coins at a discount.
This report can be seen as the counterpart to My Buy-the-Dip Checklist.

Full Premium Video


Becoming a Contrarian

Buy low and sell high they said…it would be easy…they said.

As with lots of things in life, executing such a simple strategy is rarely as easy as it sounds. However, we can always look to stack the odds in our favour.

For Check the Analyst & Check the HODLer, my toolkit for making better decisions in the Bitcoin market follows a few key principles:

First and foremost, being educated on the asset in question is critical, because that helps me understand WHY I own it, and WHY I want to accumulate it in the first place.
Data-driven decisions help me take the emotion out, and behave in a way that is more objective, countering my emotional hardware which is subjective (and is most affected by confirmation bias).
I maintain a regular DCA pattern to help keep Check the HODLer satisfied (I use a simple rule, my BTC balance must be higher every month).
I counter my fear of loss by waiting until the data tells me we are no longer locally overheated. I don’t care about buying the bottom tick, I just want to avoid buying the top tick.
I counter FOMO by slowing or even stopping my DCA when the data tells me the herd has arrived, and people are starting to feel ‘safe’. These are the moments when we’re ripping the hardest, and ironically, are the most at risk of a pullback.
Ultimately, this process is how I try to behave like a contrarian.

When it feels absolutely fantastic and exciting to buy…it’s usually a very bad idea.
When your stomach is churning, and you’re feeling horrified to buy, more often than not, that is the right time to hit the green button.
For the rest of this article, I will lay out a set of tools and ideas which help me avoid buying tops, and knowing when I should pair back my DCA strategy.

Stacking The Odds In Our Favour

My framework starts with the big picture, and revolves around mean reversion.

Mean Reversion: The idea that asset prices and market indicators tend to revert to their long-term average over time.

The secret to this is finding a suitable metric which the price tends to oscillate around over time. Once we have that anchor, we can construct a Z-Score oscillator showing us how far above or below the average the price is trading.

The first example is the 200DMA, which is a widely recognised and used indicator, often seen as a signal for a bull vs bear trend (if price is above/below). From this, we construct the Mayer Multiple, as a simple ratio of price and the 200DMA, and then convert it into a Z-Score.

 
Historically, local tops have been reached whenever the Mayer Multiple Z-Score is between +0.7σ and +1.0σ, and macro global tops when it is above +1.0σ.

Moments like this are also when the market is absolutely ripping northwards, sentiment is sky high, and the narrative is that Bitcoin has no top!




Live Chart
However, from a statistical standpoint, 80% of the time it trades lower than +0.7σ, and 90% of the time it is lower than +1.0σ.

In other words, if I buy a lump sum of Bitcoin when the Mayer Multiple-Z is trading more than +1.0σ above the mean, there is a 90% chance I just touched the sizzling plate.

It can keep going, but the statistics say that it is very unlikely, and the higher it goes, the more likely a mean reversion event is incoming (aka burnt fingers).




Live Chart
Let’s repeat the exercise with the MVRV Ratio. Whilst this may appear repetitive at first, what I want to illustrate is that many of these metrics will be speaking the same language at the same time.

This is called confluence; where we have lots of information, sourced from various indicators, all telling us the same story. We can then build an increasingly credible case to counter our default emotional hardware.

The MVRV Ratio is a great mean reversion model because it describes the ‘paper profit’ held by the average unit of BTC. When people are looking at very green numbers in their portfolio, the odds are many of them are starting to ramp up profit taking activity.

 
 
Once again, we can identify key Z-Score levels where local and global tops have formed in the past. The reason these zones are as far as we go, is precisely because there is enough profit taking by motivated sellers to overwhelm demand.




Live Chart
Now that we have the initial ideas in mind, let me explain the story told by this weird looking bar chart:

The bar heights (left axis) show the number of days where MVRV has closed at each value. Think of it like a population survey of historical MVRV levels.
For this specific chart, I am only showing bull market periods, which I have manually defined based on prior tops and bottoms in my code (the chart also has full history, and bear market values hidden too).
We can see the vast majority of the population is between -2σ and +2σ, showing that MVRV rarely trades beyond those extremes (less than 5% of the time).
The line charts (right axis) map to the percent of days where MVRV was smaller than the value on the X-Axis.
If you look at the orange dashed line at +1.0σ, and map it onto the green bull market line, we get a value of 75%. That means that if MVRV-Z is trading at +1.0σ, 75% of the time in bulls it is lower, and 25% of the time it is higher.

My read on this is MVRV-Z of +1.0σ is hot, but not sizzling hot. It probably isn’t THE top…but it could be A Top.

Now flip and look at the red dashed line at +1.5σ, showing us that 90% of days are lower…and only 10% of days are higher.

Those 10% of days are simultaneously where the maximum bull market gains occur…but also the least likely to be sustained.

Check the HODLer is NOT a buyer in those zones. We are unlikely to stay at those overheated levels, so I would rather take a step back, and allow the market to peak, cool off, and stack harder on the dips which will inevitably follow.




Live Chart
For completeness, we can briefly look at the Short-Term Holder MVRV Z-Score and see an almost identical structure. For this variant, +1.0σ to +1.5σ is a cautious level, and greater than +1.5σ is overheated.

The best way to think about Short-Term Holder variants is that it provides a faster, more responsive, and more volatile confirmation signal.

STH-MVRV will be better at spotting local tops within a macro bull market. It will also align with MVRV and Mayer Multiple when we get closer to unsustainable macro tops.




Live Chart
Here we’re talking about 85% to 95% odds that the market is overheated when we get into those levels. It is increasingly improbable that we keep going, and thus Check the HODLer makes the decision that now is NOT the right time to buy, I will wait instead.

When we have the Mayer Multiple (technical), MVRV (onchain macro) and STH-MVRV (onchain micro) all telling us there is a 90%+ chance it’s the top…

…It is probably the top.




Live Chart
Sellers Overwhelm Demand

The last three charts are what I would call ‘implicit’ or ‘implied’ models.

They look at past performance, and suggest to us that it is unlikely the market keeps going higher, and is more likely to mean revert back towards the anchor.

Those models are implicit because we are ASSUMING investors will sell when they are very profitable, or price is too far above the 200DMA.

Fortunately, we can add another layer of confluence to our analysis using explicit observations of sell-side pressure.

The chart below shows realised profit volumes mapped against standard deviations from the mean.

Notice how at the same time all of our implicit models are reaching overheated conditions, we also see a massive uptick in sell-side pressure! Cause and effect.

At the end of the day, this sell-side is what puts tops in. Unless investors actually bring supply back to market, demand will just keep bidding up coins.




Live Chart
Metrics which measure sell-side pressure are a little bit harder to read because they are far more dynamic, noisy, and affected by changes in market structure.

This is why the Sell-side Risk Ratio is one of my favourite onchain tools, because it normalises profit and loss taking by the size of the market (see Masterclass).

 
 
Whenever Sell-side Risk reaches a high value, it means the majority of coins transacting onchain are locking in a very large profit (or loss). Generally speaking, we see the highest values in bulls because profit taking is a lengthy process, capitulation events in bears and drawdowns are usually rapid short-term events.

In a bull market, which coins usually hold the biggest profits?

Those acquired by hardcore investors who accumulated in the bear.

When Sell-side Risk trends higher like this, it means the smart money is increasingly exiting stage left, and sending a signal to Check the HODLer to chill out, and wait.




Live Chart
The same story is true for Short-Term Holder Sell-side Risk, where it will provide a more volatile signal, but will be better at spotting local tops.

The higher it is, the more likely we are getting near term overheated.




Live Chart
SOPR is the sister metric to MVRV.

MVRV tells us about the avg unrealised ‘paper’ profit held by investors.
SOPR tells us about the avg realised ‘locked-in’ profit by investors.
The chart below shows standard SOPR, which includes all spent coins by both Long-Term and Short-Term Holders.

The higher SOPR is, the more profit is being taken, and the higher the chances that sell-side pressure will overwhelm demand.




Live Chart
We now have a pretty robust framework for thinking about where local and global tops form, and thus when the hot plate is sizzling away:

Price is trading too high above several mean reversion models.
Investors are locking in increasingly large profits.
Local tops will be signalled first by Short-Term Holder metrics.
Global tops will be signalled when everything lights up like a Christmas tree.
The higher MVRV, SOPR, and Realised profit metrics are, the less keen Check the HODLer is to buy significant chunks of coin.

Instead, he will take a break, and wait for these metrics and indicators to pull-back, and become less overheated.




Live Chart
A Side of Leverage

There is no better evidence that the default herd behaviour is to buy high than futures market data.

At the exact same time that MVRV and SOPR are sizzling hot…the degenerate traders are piling into leveraged long positions to ride the wave to Valhalla.

It feels the most safe to lever up when the trend has been in place for many months, and even years. It feels safe when every dip has been bought. It feels safe when the bull market sentiment is just indestructible!

Ironically, the better time to take a leveraged long position (not financial advice btw), is when the market is down in the dumps, and everyone is giga-bearish.

The worst time, is when the bull market is late stage, but it feels safe.

Funding rates often peak over 20% annualised when confidence is highest, because people feel like it is easy money, and the bulls are totally in control.

In reality, they are the herd, and are piling in at the same time as the smart money are exiting stage left. Their stop-loss becomes the cascading sell-side that hits the next guys liquidation level, and ultimately kills the upwards momentum.




Live Chart
The chart below shows the 7-day change in futures open interest, and flags in red when it has increased by +2.0σ.

Isn’t it funny how people bet the most, with the most leverage, at the absolute worst time.

This is confirmation bias of the herd displayed in chart form, and as contrarians, we can use this to our advantage to avoid buying high.




Live Chart
Concluding Thoughts

There truly is only one constant in markets: humans.

We are herd animals, and our default behaviour is to avoid risk. Our emotional hardware often makes these decisions for us, and ironically, those decisions are usually the most risky!

Rather than buying low (when it is scary), our brains desire the comfort of moving with the herd, and instead tell us to buy high when it feels safe to do so.

As investors, we must constantly work to counter our natural bias, and this is something that will never go away. Our emotional hardware is the default behaviour, and it requires experience, patience, and honestly…a bunch of lost money before you truly recognise it exists.

Making data-driven decisions is a tried and trusted way to counter our subjective options about what we WANT to happen, and instead analyse what IS happening.

Check the HODLer has bought enough tops in his time. He’s seen enough omega-candles NOT come. And he has experienced enough pull-backs in his time to be very confident that another one will arrive, eventually.

If I can avoid buying high, AND instead switch to buying low (see Masterclass), I can avoid touching the sizzling hot plate, and enjoy the meal instead.

Thanks for reading,

James




Masterclass #19: Spotting Cycle Extremes
There are many ways we can identify overheated, or oversold Bitcoin markets, but every tool comes with a bag of nuance and jargon. Today I introduce a new tool to simplify our analysis of extremes.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
JUL 17, 2025
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

There are countless metrics and tools out there for valuing Bitcoin, and each one has a bag of nuances and jargon attached to it.

The chart below is an oldie, but a goodie, which I developed many years ago as a simplified way to identify macro peaks and troughs for Bitcoin.

Under the hood, it looks at four components of the Bitcoin market, and flags when several of them are signalling overheated, or oversold conditions:

Unrealised Profit & Loss via MVRV: looking for points of maximum investor incentive to panic sell at a loss, or cash out in profit.
Realised Profit & Loss via SOPR: Tops and bottoms are only put in when people actually sell, and SOPR helps us spot points of capitulation, and heavy profit taking.
Miners get greedy via Puell Multiple: As the primary producer of Bitcoin, the higher price goes, the more USD sell-side miners can and do exert. They also tend to capitulate near bear market bottoms when they HODL too long.
HODLers entering or exiting the market via Reserve Risk: Every macro peak and trough is characterised by HODLers either cashing out, or stepping in.
As great as this tool is, after many years of service, I believe it is time we revisit and refresh this tool to account for a more holistic and professional view of the Bitcoin market.




Live Chart
Personally, I have learned a tonne since I first built this thing, and you will notice I don’t account for futures markets, or cohorts like Short-Term holders in the original design.

In today’s post, I am going to introduce an updated v2 edition of this chart, and give you a look at the models and statistics applied under the hood.

📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

Today I walk through a tool that looks at eight metrics from the onchain, technical and futures world, and distils it into a simple indicator for cycle tops and bottoms.
The concept is to identify the behaviours and characteristics we expect to see near cycle extremes, and then select metrics which describe those behaviours and mean reversion properties.
The next step is to identify thresholds for what constitutes an extreme level. I use simple statistics and Z-score transformations for this, with tops defined as levels with 10% of less days being higher, and bottoms 15% to 20% being lower.
When we stitch all of these models together, we can spot confluence, and when 4-of-8 flash an extreme, it is a warning sign, and when 6-of-8 flash it is getting pretty spicy.
Current Market Read: Based on this signal indicator, it does not seem like we have hit any of the extreme thresholds to the upside right now, which is great to see. The last major upticks were in March this year, and December 2024 when we set the two local peaks.

If we assume humans will continue to behave euphorically near the top…then it would suggest we’re in the first leg higher of this third phase of the bull. Sit tight.

Full Premium Video


Finding Confluence

In all forms of analysis, it can be quite tricky to develop a high degree of confidence when only one indicator or tool is giving you an answer. This is especially true when you have diverging signals, or when two tools you trust disagree with one another.

A natural thing people want to model and understand for Bitcoin are the cycle extremes, namely when the market is reaching some kind of cyclical peak, or bear market bottom.

One of the earliest Checkonchain Masterclass modules covered my onchain analysis framework, and how I separate most onchain metrics into three key axes:

Spent vs Unspent: Are we analysing coins held in wallets, or coins on the move?
Profit vs Loss: Are those coins sitting on, or locking in gains, or crystallising losses?
By Whom?: What kind of investors are we looking at? Long or Short-Term Holders? Miners? Whales? Exchanges?
I would encourage readers to revisit this framework if you haven’t already, as it provides a neat background for why I select the specific metrics I do to solve problems each week. We will build on these ideas today, and you will no doubt see a theme throughout the eight metrics I select for this study.




Live Chart
The core reason I use multiple metrics spanning various axes of this framework is to find confluence.

This about the conditions we expect at a bull cycle top:

The price has ripped significantly above long-term mean reversion models.
Investors are sitting on fat healthy paper gains.
HODLers who bought cheap coins in the bear are taking large profits.
The supply is increasingly held by speculators and new investors.
Miners are making money hand over fist, leading them to either sell…or more commonly…invest excessive sums into new ASIC chips near the top.
Traders are paying massive interest rates for the privilege of going levered-long.
When we have all, or many of these conditions lining up at the same time, there is a much higher chance that we are staring at a bull cycle peak.

This is called confluence, and the chart below is a preview into the v2 version of this tool that looks for conditions signalling extremes near tops and bottoms.

We’re now going to get into the nuts and bolts to understand how I created this bizarre looking thing.

Don’t trust, verify.




Live Chart
Unrealised Profit & Loss: MVRV

Whenever you hear me talk about MVRV, I want you to immediately think of the incentive of investors to sell.

MVRV metrics describe the average profit and loss held by the market, and when everyone is holding large paper gains, the probabilities have increased that profit taking sell-side will kick into gear.

A similar dynamic is true on the downside, as heavy paper losses, and big red numbers in the portfolio are what eventually shakes out everyone with paper hands.

The first two metrics are MVRV, and STH-MVRV, which capture this dynamic for the entire market, and for Short-Term Holders, respectively.

For all of these metrics, I apply a Z-score transformation, which normalises them, and describes how far they have deviated from their long term average.

For the generic MVRV Ratio, this is a macro scale oscillator, and primarily captures Long-Term Holders, since they are the ones who drive sell-side at tops, and are willing to carry heavy losses near the bottom without being shaken out.

Note: notice how I have not used LTH-MVRV. The reason is we can achieve near identical results with either metric, but LTH-MVRV needs a lot more transformation given its higher amplitude moves. We could also use AVIV Ratio, but they will provide much the same result in this case generally speaking.




Live Chart
For MVRV-Z, I have identified tops whenever we are above +1.5σ, and bottoms when we are below -1.0σ.

Tops represent the right long-tail, when paper gains are massive, and we only trade higher in around 10% of days. The odds suggest we’re getting a bit high.
Bottoms are the left tail, and notice how there is a large cluster of events below this level, with around 15% of days trading down here. This is the lengthy drawn out process of HODLers hammering out a bottom, stacking sats when conditions are the most grim.



Live Chart
Short-Term Holder MVRV is a faster and more responsive version, but the principles applied are identical. I have included STH-MVRV given it is one of my most used tools, and gives a very clean overview of both local and global conditions.

STH-MVRV is going to be much better at spotting local tops compared to standard MVRV, as it only tracks where price is relative to new investors.

When even the dude who bought last month is sitting on large paper gains…you know the market is running hot.




Live Chart
For STH-MVRV, I have opted for very similar left and right tail thresholds of +1.0σ and +1.25σ, respectively. These deliver the same percent of days trading lower or higher than this threshold, which keeps things nice and consistent.




Live Chart
When I plot both of these MVRV Z-Scores on the same axis, we can see how they tend to trade into extreme levels around the same time.

There is a degree of conservatism built in here, because I want to try and capture modern peaks, where we may not get the kind of crazy run-away price action seen in prior cycles when Bitcoin was much smaller.




Live Chart
The chart below shows the final signal generated from MVRV (yellow) and STH-MVRV (orange).

The way I have constructed it is as a set of staggered bars, which will switch on in a positive or negative state whenever we breach the upper or lower extreme thresholds.

In our current cycle so far, we have not seen any sustained periods of extreme in either metric (aside from very brief flashes from STH-MVRV during major dips).

To date, this cycle has not seen the average investor sitting on excessive paper profits, which is evidence as to why we keep drifting higher…until we do.




Live Chart
Fear and Greed: SOPR

The next two metrics are actually the sister metrics of MVRV.

Where MVRV metrics describe unrealised paper profit/loss, SOPR metrics describe realised profit/loss being taken by spent coins.

MVRV describes the incentive.
SOPR describes whether investors took action.
Including SOPR metrics is how I model the actualised sell-side pressure coming from the market, because sellers are what puts in tops, and capitulation events are what puts the nail in the coffin for bottoms.




Live Chart
I won’t run through the histogram studies for these two, since the logic is identical to the MVRV traces.

Of course I have included STH-SOPR, since it is the Swiss army knife of onchain tools, and works in all weather conditions. Like STH-MVRV, it is more adept at tagging both local and global extremes.




Live Chart
The resulting signal from SOPR and STH-SOPR will then flag when either or both metrics have reached extreme profit taking (positive) or capitulation (negative) levels. STH-SOPR will be more indicative of both local and global extremes, whilst standard SOPR will be more attune to macro cyclical events.

Notice how we get maximum profit taking (positive) and crystallised losses (negative) near cycle extremes.

In our cycle so far, we have only seen a few brief events, aligned with local maxima and minima, but both indicated that the market had hit an inflection point.

A key insight here is that whilst this tool is designed for picking major extremes near cycle tops and bottoms, the individual components can still be used to spot more local events.

It still matters when heavy profit or loss is being taken, even if other indicators have not hit their extreme thresholds.




Live Chart
Macro Oscillators

Markets are mean reverting, largely a result of human psychology, and our natural herd behaviour response to fear and greed.

In order to ensure we are not solely relying on onchain mean reversion metrics like MVRV and SOPR, I have also included the Mayer Multiple, being the ratio between price and the 200DMA.

This technical-derived oscillator tends to trade in more macro cycles, and peaks above and below the ±1.0σ levels.




Live Chart
In terms of probabilities, the upper +1.0σ level is only hit during 10% of all trading days, whilst the market only trades below the lower -1.0σ level 20% of the time.




Live Chart
To bolster the Mayer Multiple, there are two additional sectors of market structure which tend to be very cyclical on a macro basis:

Miners expressed via the Puell Multiple: Miners have always been a pro-cyclical entity, accumulating and HODLing BTC in the good times…and puking them all out in bankruptcy in the bad times.

The Puell multiple is a ratio between current miner revenue in USD, and their 365d avg revenue. When miners are making money hand over fist, it also means that the price has run excessively relative to the 1yr average (since block rewards are constant for 4yrs at a time.

In this respect, the Puell Multiple is both an indicator of miner profitability relative to their 1yr benchmark, but also a faster Mayer Multiple (kind of like a STH-Mayer!).

The second cyclical entity in Bitcoin cycles are the Long-Term Holders.

I use the Reserve Risk metric as a tool to model the balance of wealth held between Long-Term HODLers, and new fast money speculators.

As we know, HODLers have become increasingly adept at selling in the good times, and then patiently accumulating in the bad times. When the Reserve Risk Z-Score hits elevated levels, it usually corresponds to miners making too much money, and both entities have a growing incentive to cash out, and wait for things to cool off.

Despite the Puell Multiple, and Reserve Risk being computed from completely different sets of data, notice how aligned they are when it comes to reaching cycle extremes!




Live Chart
When we bring all three of these macro scale oscillators into the final signal, we can see how they all progressively heat up as their respective statistical thresholds are breached.




Live Chart
Futures Leverage: Funding Rates

For the final market sector, we of course have to include a view on leverage, and by far the best all encompassing input is futures funding rates.

Funding rates are the ideal input metric for this study, as they are a natural oscillator, capturing the urgency and demand for leverage, but perpetual swaps are also ubiquitous in this industry, accessible to both retail, crypto-native funds, and institutional hedge funds alike.

The data-set for funding rates is shorter than that of onchain and price related data, and I have opted for a 1yr Z-score to allow it to adjust more rapidly as the market cycle changes. For example, we saw sustained funding rates of over 100% annualised back in the mania of the 2021 bull, and I personally doubt we will see that kind of stupidity moving forwards.

The 1yr Z-Score for funding rates helps us spot when the demand for leverage is increasing sharply compared to recent history (positive), but also when a sizeable deleveraging or market rest has occurred (negative).




Live Chart
Much like STH-SOPR, funding rates are going to be more responsive, and add a degree of conservatism into the model. I expect the demand for leverage to increase as the market rallies, and more people feel like the bull is bullet-proof…




Live Chart
Bringing It All Together

We now have eight metrics from a variety of onchain, technical, and futures market sectors. Each one has a set of statistical thresholds on the upside and downside, and we can count how many of them are now trading at extreme levels.

When 4-of-8 metrics flag as overheated, it sends a cautious signal, that either topping or bottoming conditions are starting to form.
When 6-of-8 metrics flag as overheated, it sends a warning shot that we’re trading in thin air, and the probabilities are now less than 10% that we keep going across many indicators.
We now have a confluence indicator that is calibrated for modern market conditions to identify topping and bottoming conditions.

For me as an analyst, this also acts as a quick overview tool, and when a certain set of indicators flash, I can dive into those, and the ones that are missing to better diagnose what might be happening.




Live Chart
Concluding Thoughts

As your Bitcoin personal trainer, I am very aware that I (most likely) spend a lot more time noodling around in this data than you do. It is my job after all.

There are infinite metrics out there, and it is very much a ‘right tool for the right job’ kind of deal. With so much jargon and esoteric nuance to keep on top of, it can be quite tricky to simplify things at times.

When I construct tools like this one, my goal isn’t to build the most accurate infallible topping signal ever created.

My goal is to simplify all the complexity I think through daily, into the key insight that matters, and to build a tool that is ‘good enough’ to solve the problem.

We never know when the top or the bottom will form, but we have a far better read on what conditions create those inflection points.

Rather than pretending we can pick a top price for this cycle, instead flip it around; show me the conditions which create a top, and then look at the price!

For any new tool, there will be optimisations and iterations needed, and there are no guarantees we hit the statistical thresholds I have chosen. Demand could fizzle out with a whimper tomorrow, and we slide miserably into a bear market.

It could happen…but if there is one thing I have learned about Bitcoin, it inspires people to make really dumb (and expensive) financial decisions near the top. Assuming human behaviour is a constant in markets…I think there are decent odds we see a meaningful top form at higher prices, with a bunch of these signals flashing like a Christmas tree.

If you believe that last statement, as I do, then the coolest insight is we’re probably not there yet!

Thanks for reading,

James


Masterclass #21: Wen Top?
"How to spot Bitcoin cycle tops?" is by far the most popular question I receive as an analyst. Whilst we cannot predict the future, we can model where things are getting a bit silly.
JAMES CHECK (CHECKMATEY)
AUG 11, 2025
∙ PAID

G’day Folks,

The two most popular questions in Bitcoin; Wen Top, and Where Top?

The reason this question is so popular seems obvious, but it very much depends on who you are, and what stage of life you are in;

For hardcore HODLers, you may not plan to sell any Bitcoin, but if you’re like me, you probably don’t want to pour a large lump sum of capital in at the top…again. You might also be in a stage of life where you want to buy a house, pay off a mortgage, or pay for your kids to attend a great school or college.
For money managers and retirees, you either don’t have the latitude with your clients to weather a bear, or you don’t have the time to sit through years of choppy downside, no matter how strong your conviction is.
For speculators and cycle traders, you’re very aware that every swing trade and cycle has an expiration date, and spotting overheated conditions is useful in that it preserves your portfolio value to take opportunities in the downturn.
For many of us, Bitcoin is a dominant part of our net worth, and having an awareness of when our life savings are in a near-term bubble is obviously very useful.
The reason people want to identify cycle tops often has nothing to do with their conviction on Bitcoin as an asset.

Instead, it is a reflection of how bear markets affect our quality of life, and the truth is, they can limit our options more than many Bitcoiners like to admit.

I’m not planning on selling any Bitcoin this cycle, but I also don’t plan to buy heavily when every metric I have is flashing more warning signs than a Christmas tree. I love Bitcoin, but I love living a stress free life with plenty of optionality even more.

No matter what your reason is, being able to think through scenarios in advance helps to develop not only your Bitcoin strategy, but your life plans as well.

Today’s post is going to be a deep dive on how I think about Bitcoin cycle tops, and the tools I use to write my plan down on paper, months before I need it.




Live Chart
📈 Reminder: you can find the charts from our articles on the Checkonchain Charting Website, and a guide in our Charts Tutorial Video.

Premium Members will find the TL:DR summary, video update and the rest of the written post below. Consider upgrading to premium today to unlock the rest of the content!

Disclaimer: This article is general in nature, and is for informational, and entertainment purposes only, and it shall not be relied upon for any investment or financial decisions.

TL;DR

Predicting the future is a fool’s errand, and nobody will ever be able to spot the exact top in the heat of the moment.
What we can do however, is rely on human behaviour in markets to remain constant, and this includes speculators FOMO buying at tops, whilst smart money HODLers sell increasingly large volumes in profit.
In order to estimate the price levels where these dynamics are likely to come into play, we can use a set of mean reversion models to identify prices where sell-side pressure has ramped up aggressively in the past.
Should we reach those levels in the future, we can confirm that selling is underway, and that we have the conditions we expect for the formation of a major top.
The goal of this study is not to predict the future. Instead, I use it as a framework to make my decisions ahead of time, such that I never feel like a deer in the headlights if we get there.
As it stands today, the current topping cloud readings are:
$134k to $142k likely next stop before profit taking ramps up.
$147k to $153k starts getting warm, with only 10% of days being higher.
$176k to $186k is overheated, with most models having < 5% of days higher.
$240k+ is in moon math territory, and I don’t expect the market will sustain such levels, and likely lead into a serious drawdown.
As of today, none of the conditions we expect at a top are in play, and sell-side is cooling off right now, not ramping up. I suspect our next post will open with ‘happy ATH folks!’

Full Premium Video


Start With A Good Compass

Since we will be working with lots of price models today, it makes sense to start with a quick review of the main ones I look at, and what they all mean.

🟣 The Realised Price is the average onchain cost basis for all BTC in the supply. It includes every coin, from Satoshi, to Exchanges, to ETFs, through to your DCA stack. Bear markets have historically bottomed below this model, however I have reasons to believe those days are behind us (see Rethinking Bears).
🔵 The True Market Mean is a modified version of Realised Price which more accurately reflects the avg cost basis per active investor. It trades in the middle of the Bitcoin price (statistically speaking), and is the ideal mean reversion model.
The True Market Mean also lines up with the cost basis of IBIT, Strategy, and my yet untested thesis is that I believe it will play the role of the bear market floor when the time comes.
🟢 Vaulted Price is a model that reflects the ‘potential energy’ of sell-side pressure within the system. It tends to trade near the lower bound of the Topping Cloud, and is the level where I expect HODLers will ramp up their profit taking pressure.
As we approach and surpass the Vaulted price, we’re getting closer to peak sell-side pressure. The closer we get to the True Market Mean and Realised Price, the more oversold Bitcoin is, and the heavier the accumulation will be by serious investors.

All of these models are macro in scale, and form a nice set of boundaries to think about the Bitcoin cycle.




Live Chart
There is one additional price model that is extremely important, and that is the Short-Term Holder cost basis.

🔴 The STH cost basis is the most responsive onchain price model, and captures the avg acquisition price for recent buyers (within the last 155-days). It provides support in bulls, resistance in bears, and I use it literally all the time.
It is ok to be bullish when the price is trading above the STH cost basis. Every bullish market impulse rewards recent buyers, and strong uptrends will occur above this level.




Live Chart
The flip-side of this observation is that whenever we drop below the STH cost basis, it is prudent to adopt a more cautious view.

Something we have noticed and explored throughout this newsletter, is that the price has tended to trade below the STH cost basis during chopsolidation periods, where it used to find support in prior bull cycles.

To finalise our big picture market compass, here are some tips:

When price is above the STH cost basis —> It is ok to be bullish.
When price drops below it —> be cautious, and patient, but perhaps not yet outright bearish. We have tools to track how bad the unrealised losses are, and to look for Top Heaviness to distinguish a dip from a bear.
When we trade below both the STH cost basis & True Market Mean —> we’re in the nasty stages of a bear market. Be very patient, and it is time to start looking for signals of capitulation and maximum pain.
🧭 Now that we have our market compass, It shows we’re allowed to be bullish (above STH cost basis at $106k), and we shouldn’t be too concerned about a cycle top right now (trading well below Vaulted Price at $138k).




Live Chart
Mean Reversion Magic

The Topping Cloud model I showed in the introduction is the end result of the process I am about to explore. Many of the concepts are similar to the process we ran through in the Spotting Cycle Extremes Masterclass, which is very much aligned with this study.

Markets are mean reverting, which means there are certain anchors that the price oscillates around over macro and micro time-frames.

The trick is selecting the right anchor, and in my opinion, there is no better anchor than the profitability of investors. This is why I use a variety of MVRV Ratios as my bread and butter metrics for spotting tops and bottoms.

 
I’ve converted MVRV into a Z-Score in the chart below, which gives us a statistical read on how far away we have stretched from the mean.

When investors are sitting on huge paper gains, it means price is much higher than their cost basis. As a result MVRV will be trading at statistically high levels.
When investors are sitting on nasty unrealised losses, price is well below their cost basis, and the odds of capitulation and bottom formation are much higher.
Today, Bitcoin at $118k is trading +0.8σ above the average MVRV level, which is warm, but certainly not overheated.




Live Chart
So how do we define warm vs heated vs overheated?

How high is too high?

The histogram below shows the distribution of closing values of MVRV-Z in bull markets. The ‘S-curves’ go from 0% to 100%, showing the cumulative sum of days where MVRV has been lower than the x-axis value.

⚫ 20% of days have seen MVRV-Z trading above +1.0σ, which is close to where the market is currently trading.
🟠 10% of days have seen MVRV-Z trading above +1.5σ, which I’d argue is getting pretty warm, although there is scope to keep running.
🔴 5% of days have seen MVRV-Z trading above +2.0σ, meaning there is a 95% chance we’re overheated, and frankly, unlikely in a stable equilibrium.
Notice the long-tail on the right hand side? There are considerably fewer days where MVRV-Z trades this far above from the mean, and the odds are increasingly in favour of the bears.

Note however, that this long-tail is where price rips very hard, very fast, and the twitter narrative will be: new paradigm, there is no top!

I use these tools to dispassionately ignore those narratives, and trust the process that mean reversions exist, and it is highly unlikely that the market keeps going up indefinitely. Every smart money investor knows this, and acts accordingly.




Live Chart
As a quick summary, the tools we now have in our belt are:

We selected an onchain cost basis anchor (in this case, the Realised Price).
Price mean reverts around that anchor because investors make decisions to sell, or buy whenever they are too profitable, or the market is oversold.
We have also studied the distribution of MVRV, and established thresholds for where there is a 20%, 10%, and 5% chance we stay above that level.
Based on this workflow, we can now ask a very important question:

What price do we need to reach, for the average investor to be so profitable, that the market has topped out 80%, 90% or even 95% of the time?

This is the process I used to develop these topping cloud models, by converting all of the above work, into a price level where those thresholds get hit.

Using MVRV as our mean reversion model, it would suggest that Bitcoin prices at $153k are in the upper 10% of probabilities, and a price of $186k is getting super overheated, with only 5% of days being that stretched to the upside.

These models are also Moving Targets (see Masterclass), which is a result of them automatically adjusting to capital inflows and outflows, so use them to assess overheated conditions on an ongoing basis.




Live Chart
Right Tool For The Right Job

Which MVRV variant should I use?

As is often the case, it depends, but here is a simple framework to think about this problem:

For near term events (next 3-6 months) look at Short-Term Holder MVRV.
For macro cycle events, look at the standard MVRV or AVIV (similar but uses True Market Mean as the anchor).
For moon math extreme peaks, look at Long-Term Holder MVRV.
As we know, markets do not go up in a straight line, and even if we are destined to reach $186k (MVRV at +2.0σ), we have to get through $140k first.

We will hit many local peaks on the road before we hit the ultimate global peak, and this is where Short-Term Holder MVRV becomes a fantastic tool.

I will quickly run through a similar exercise for the STH-MVRV Z-score to help nail down these concepts.




Live Chart
As of today, STH-MVRV-Z is remarkably cooled down, and is barely trading above its long-term average (the Z-score is at +0.17σ). Based on the histogram below, you can see we’re dead centre in the population, with the following probabilities:

🟠 40% of all trading days are higher (no differentiation between bull vs bear).
🟢 53% of days in bull markets are higher.
Very hard for me to argue we’re overheated by this metric, and that means the bull has a lot of room to run before STHs become excessively profitable.




Live Chart
When we study the long-right-tail of events for STH-MVRV-Z, we would have to get above +1.0σ to start warming up (15% chance of going higher), and above +1.5σ before we’re really overheated and trading in thin air (5% chance of higher).




Live Chart
When we convert these into pricing bands we end up with:

🟠 $126k is warming up, indicating fresh ATHs likely initiate some profit taking by swing traders.
🔴 $134k to $142k is overheated, and it is likely we see some form of interim peak start to form, or at least serious resistance.
But Check…these prices feel a little bit lacklustre for a cycle top!?

Yes! But remember, this is based on Short-Term Holders. The STH cost basis anchor moves much faster than the slow Realised Price or True Market Mean.

If we spend just a few weeks-months consolidating or correcting, the STH cost basis will gradually increase as coins change hands to meet us, making space for the next leg higher.

Markets are a process, not a result, and so long as we use the right tool for the right job, market conditions will be much easier to navigate.




Live Chart
Moon Math vs Normal Math

At some stage, we will get overheated conditions across every single MVRV variant.

When both Long-Term HODLers, and short-term speculators are all sitting on fat healthy gains, that is when I personally will become extremely cautious, as the risks are now shifting in favour of a more serious cyclical peak.

The chart below brings the pricing models from several MVRV variants into one chart, and you can hopefully now see the confluence in the way they overlap.

The more of these price models we cross above, the more profitable every cohort of investors are, and the more likely they are to start unloading heavy sell-side pressure.

Let’s imagine the Bitcoin price starts ripping higher:

The next stop is probably around $134k to $142k, where Vaulted Price is located, and Short-Term Holders will be in an overheated condition.
We enter thin air, with 10% chance to keep going, at $147k to $153k. MVRV and AVIV are both entering the long-right-tail of events, but that is also when investor demand is the most euphoric.
The Christmas tree of warnings, signalling 5% odds are hit between $176k and $186k. We can get here, but the odds are not in our favour to keep going. Sell-side profit taking will likely be very high, and demand is probably approaching serious exhaustion.
We cannot predict whether we reach these levels, but we can reasonably assume what investors will be doing if we get there (taking profits because their profit motivated incentive is statistically high).




Live Chart
Now all of the above is what I would consider to be ‘normal math’, and this is the world that Check the Analyst lives in.

…Check the HODLer…well, he dabbles in a little bit of moon math, and this is really about describing where the absolute pico top could reach.

For this, I run a similar study on Long-Term Holder MVRV, and the Mayer Multiple (using the 200DMA as the anchor).

If you wake up, and the Bitcoin price is trading north of $240k in 2025…

…suffice to say, Check the HODLer absolutely won’t be stacking sats that day.




Live Chart
Confirmation Signals

Everything we have covered so far is about the incentive structure of investors. People naturally take profit when they are in a lot of profit.

However, it is pretty hard to form a top when NOBODY is selling!

Thankfully, we can confirm our thesis about investor incentives by analysing metrics that describe sell-side pressure.

I am going to zip through the following charts to keep it brief, but I want readers to ask yourself what you would expect to see at a Bitcoin cycle top?

Heavy profit taking volumes.
Old coins which were acquired in the bear coming back to life.
Sell-side pressure is large compared to the asset size.
Speculators paying crazy premiums to be leveraged long.
So now imagine we’re trading at $150k…$186k…$240k!!!

You see realised profit volumes ripping through the roof…

Right now they are cooling down, suggesting HODLers are easing off the sell-side, likely preparing for the next move up.




Live Chart
You see SOPR variants reaching elevated levels, indicating the average coin is locking in very healthy profit multiples.

Note, this is also cooling off right now, a great sign.




Live Chart
The sell-side risk ratio is peaking at high levels, meaning the sell-side is large even compared to the size of the asset (measured via the Realised Cap).

Also cooling off right now…the spring is coiled folks, strap in.




Live Chart
Old coins are coming to life to consolidate UTXOs take profits because the market is getting stupid overvalued.

…I feel like a broken record now, revived supply is cooling off as well!




Live Chart
Coindays Destroyed increases, indicative of more and more OGs, who bought in the bear, and HODLed for years, bringing coins back to market.




Live Chart
And of course, the speculators think right now…with all this sell-side pressure, and all these warning signals…now is the time to lever up and go long…

You just have to love the contra signal which FOMO and human greed paint in this data.




Live Chart
Concluding Thoughts

The skinny is, spotting the exact top is impossible. I have long since given up any expectation of predicting the exact top, and anyone who is selling that story, is pullin’ ya leg.

What I am very confident of, is that human behaviour in markets will always be a constant we can rely on, and FOMO is one hell of a drug.

If we keep ratcheting up the price, and smart money investors see larger and larger green numbers in their portfolio, at some point, they will unload a portion as sell-side pressure. The more people who have this feeling, the more selling will occur, and it will eventually over-saturate demand.

This top finding framework is not about being pinpoint accurate. Instead, it is about knowing what prize zones are likely to motivate more and more sellers.

I use these models to think through ahead of time what Check the HODLer will do. Once we get into the 10% portion of that topping cloud, I will no longer be allocating lump sum chunks, and will switch off the daily DCA. I will just enjoy the ride, and patiently wait until we reach some kind of correction or plateau where things are less exuberant.

The faster we move higher, the less sustainable it is.

The slower we move, and the more chopsolidation we have along the way, the more time our mean reversion anchors have to catch up, and cool things down.

We cannot predict the future, but we can certainly prepare for it.

None of us can control what the market will do.

But we can control what our decisions will be IF it gets there.

I have a sneaking suspicion we will be putting this Topping Cloud to the test very soon, which is an exciting idea. Strap in.

Thanks for reading,

James

